The Project Gutenberg eBook of On old Cape Cod
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: On old Cape Cod

Author: Ferdinand C. Lane

Illustrator: Rena V. Rockwell

Release date: July 31, 2025 [eBook #76602]

Language: English

Original publication: Orleans, Mass: The Cape Codder Printery, 1961

Credits: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON OLD CAPE COD ***



                            ON OLD CAPE COD

                        _By Ferdinand C. Lane_

                    _Drawings by Rena V. Rockwell_

                            SECOND EDITION

                           To Emma - my Wife

                  Copyright 1961 by Ferdinand C. Lane




[Illustration]




                            ON OLD CAPE COD


    How rich is life on old Cape Cod
    Where autumn smiles in golden rod,
    And marshes flame, though not with fire -
    A region blest of heart’s desire.
    In vain we’d roam the Seven Seas
    There are no quainter shores than these.

    Here nature in indulgent mood
    Enfolds us with her solitude;
    And here her cleansing winds combine
    The tonic of the salt and pine,
    The while old ocean’s muffled swells
    Are chiming like cathedral bells.

    The days drift by without a care
    As sweet fern odors scent the air,
    And watching wheeling gulls at play
    The world of strife seems far away.
    It must have been a kindly God
    Who shaped the sands of old Cape Cod.




                          TABLE OF CONTENTS

  On Monomoy                              5

  The Song of the Sea Shell               6

  Winds of the Cape                       7

  The Enchanted Marsh                     8

  The Fragrance of the Cape               9

  Sea Lavender                           10

  The Final Rose                         10

  Fairy Rings                            11

  Beach Plums                            12

  On Truro Hills                         13

  My Drift Wood Fire                     15

  The Sand Piper                         16

  The Whistling Buoy off Nauset          17

  Peaked Hill Bars                       18

  The Rime of the Three Captains         19

  Storm Signals                          20

  Neptune’s Coursers                     21

  To a Spider Web wet with Dew           22

  The Dunes                              23

  The Flight of the Wild Geese           25

  Sweet Fern                             26

  White Sail                             26

  The Humming Bird                       27

  O Road that Winds Among the Hills      28

  The Beach Grass Threnody               28

  To a Rose Jar                          29

  Blue Berries                           30

  The Watcher                            31

  The Sea Shell Boat                     32

  Flotsam                                33

  The Ancient Log Book                   34

  The Dance of the Moon Beams            35

  Marshes of Sandwich                    37

  The Smile of the Sea                   37

  Our Cape Cod Home                      38

  Thunder Storm Off Race Point           40

  To a Scrimshawed Whale’s Tooth         41

  Creeping Fog                           42

  Wooden Sailor                          43

  The Dreamer                            44

  The Chant of the Night Wind            45

  Midnight                               46

  The Golden Rod                         47

  Wild Roses                             48

  The Coast Guard Station                49

  Keeper of the Light                    50

  On Chatham Bars                        51

  The Old Timer’s Lament                 52

  Revery                                 53

  The Old Hulk                           54

  The Modernists                         55

  When the Locusts are In Bloom          57

  The Harvest of the Sea                 58

  Beach Grass                            59

  The Swamp Heron                        61

  The Throes of Creation                 62

  Hog’s Back Church                      63

  Beyond the Point                       66

  The Winds of Time                      67

  To an Aged Willow                      68

  The Old Woods Road                     69

  The Poverty Weed                       70

  The Sweep of the Tides                 71

  Lost Billingsgate                      73

  Transformed                            74

  Haunting Echoes                        74

  Lost at Sea                            75

  The Aspen                              76

  The Song of the Sea Gulls              77

  Broken Fragments                       78

  Workers of Magic                       79

  My Golden Fleece                       80

  The Lone Lilac                         81

  Friendly Lights                        82

  To My Cherry Blossom                   83

  Grains of Sand                         84

  The Funeral Wreath                     84

  Memory                                 85

  The Stoker                             89

  Imagination                            91

  In Wellfleet by the Sea                95




                              ON MONOMOY


    Gigantic finger, joint by joint,
    Thrust out in warning from the land
    To lurking shoals, along your point
    We tread a skeleton of sand,
    Till at the end we seem to be
    Where all the world dissolves in sea
          On Monomoy.

    O’er Stone Horse shoal and Pollock Rip
    The sullen tides sweep on apace
    Where many a gallant sailing ship
    Has found her final resting place;
    But of the dead - no man may say
    Till redly dawns the judgment day
          On Monomoy.

    For fishermen tell ghastly tales
    Of wrecks and shuddering moons that mark
    Red murder done, and spectral hails
    Of Yo-Hoes keening from the dark!
    So in the night when breakers moan
    Fear trails his steps who walks alone
          On Monomoy.

    Waif of the seas and old Cape Cod
    Where Gosnold voyaged long ago,
    Where bold Champlain in armor trod,
    What tales the muttering undertow
    Could Whisper - or the sea birds scream
    To brooding dune and marsh adream
          On Monomoy.




                       THE SONG OF THE SEA SHELL


    Come press your coral lip against my ear
    Frail vagrant of the sea,
    And sing to me the songs I love to hear
    From ocean’s symphony.

    Of tides that set in far off palmy isles
    Where ukuleles strum,
    And star eyed maidens wreathed in flowers and smiles
    Dance to your rhythmic hum.

    No plaintive bird, full throated with the spring,
    Warbles a sweeter note
    Than those enchanting melodies that ring
    Within your pearly throat.

    Sonorous chords that sound a minor key,
    Sea chanties hoarse and low,
    The echoes of the mermaid’s minstrelsy,
    And songs the sirens know.

    But now a bit of flotsam on the beach
    Imprisoned in my hand,
    I listen to the mysteries you teach
    And strive to understand.

    Your music leaves me in a brooding vein
    Sweet chantress of the deep,
    For in those elfin strains you wake again
    From death’s engulfing sleep

    And when, like you, upon life’s farthest shore
    Time bears my empty shell,
    O may such songs as your immortal store
    Be mine as well!




                           WINDS OF THE CAPE


    Winds of the Cape, go tearing by
    Down the wild canyons of the sky!
    When winter’s cold has stripped the trees,
    And fields are bare and waters freeze,
    We hear them in the dead of night
    Careering on their headlong flight -
    The formless horsemen of the blast
    In gales of darkness rushing past!

    Winds of the Cape in gladness ring
    With all the lilting songs of spring!
    When fresh and clean the world awakes,
    And petals fall in snowy flakes
    From beach plum bush and apple tree
    There comes the haunting melody
    From sky land’s caravans once more -
    Wild geese in flight for Labrador!

    Winds of the Cape in Summer days
    When shore and dune dissolve in haze,
    Come drifting down the heavenly leas
    From cloudland’s floating Hebrides,
    Caressing with your langorous calm,
    And coolness like a healing balm;
    And whispering tales of Araby
    Palm fringing some enchanted sea.

    Winds of the Cape, what sadness blends
    In those wild gusts that Autumn sends
    Down empty hallways of the sky,
    To echo ever mournfully
    The footsteps of the dying year;
    To grieve o’er woods and meadows sere
    For things we loved so much - but lost
    Like blossoms withered by the frost.




                          THE ENCHANTED MARSH


    O ripples in the marshland grass
    Like waves on an enchanted sea,
    The winds, with trailing garments pass
    Invisible adown the lea
    Each footprint, evanescent, pressed
    In shadowed highlight, trough and crest.

    No spray upon those waves is seen
    To splash upon the marshy bank;
    Uncanny sea so strangely green!
    While lurking in those coverts dank
    What things of the abyss may dwell
    Only the fear hushed winds might tell.

    Far off where dunes aspiring melt
    Into the sky, those currents flow
    In turmoil neither heard nor felt
    How furtively they come and go!
    Things yet undreamed of well might be
    Submerged beneath so weird a sea.

    No surges break but in our ear
    An elfin murmuring seems to sound,
    So vague it is we scarce may hear.
    O can it be the far off pound
    Of foamless surf on sands unseen
    Beyond that shimmering waste of green?

    And we who sail that eerie sea
    Go drifting on a tide of dreams
    To unknown isles in fantasy,
    Borne on the undulating beams
    Of sun, dim litten, or the moon
    That cringes o’er the farthest dune.

    How timelessly it ebbs and flows,
    That sea of ever changing light,
    And whence it bears us no one knows
    To what wild chasms of the night
    Where fancy, yearning to explore
    Pauses, aghast, upon the shore.




                       THE FRAGRANCE OF THE CAPE


    The sun, that sovereign alchemist, and winds
    That do his bidding, gleaning from the wilds
    Sweet essences and savory condiments
    Have mingled them in that vast crucible
    Of hill and hollow, swamp and circling sea,
    And like the witch’s cauldrons, from that brew
    Evoked a fragrance sweet as Araby.
    The honeyed breath of Mayflowers in the spring,
    The nectar lingering in the elfin cups
    Of purple lilacs, fairy scents distilled
    By pendant locust blossoms, essences
    That lade the air when the wild roses bloom
    In scarlet flames that beautify the hills;
    The resinous aroma of the pines
    In summer heats when crows call languidly
    To droning bumble bees and gulls float past
    Like wisps of snowy cloud; the musk of swamps
    Where swaying cat tails shimmer in the sun
    And the noon stillness echoes to the calls
    Of blackbirds clarion shrill; the pungent smell
    Of sage grass by the tidal pool, the spice
    Of sweet fern from the hillsides redolent
    With beachplum and the subtle frankincense
    Of waxen bayberry, and over all
    The faint, elusive permeating scent
    Of sand and salt and spray from shore and sea.
    The mace and cinnamon of far off isles
    Are in that odor intimate and quaint
    And lasting as the memories that cling
    To weathered houses, gardens colorful
    With hollyhocks and dahlias, rimmed with shells;
    Or stranded hulls that brood in lonely coves
    By crumbling piers where once proud vessels lay.
    The romance and adventure of those days
    When stanch descendants of the Pilgrim band
    Carved out from sand and wilderness their homes
    And wrung a hard subsistence from the deep,
    Still linger in the memories of that time,
    And in the perfume subtle, vague and strange
    That charm elusive as the whispering breeze,
    Sad as the setting sun athwart the dunes,
    Mysterious as the ever changing sea,
    The wild sweet, haunting fragrance of the Cape.




                             SEA LAVENDER


    Upon the marsh a filmy blur
    As delicate as gossamer;
    A wraith of fog, a vaporous wisp
    With stem and leaves and branches crisp,
    Their fibre toughened by the gale,
    Can plant so hardy seem so frail?

    Half hidden mid its stalks of green
    The flowerets are scarcely seen
    As dainty specks of ocean’s blue,
    Or bits of sky that filtered through,
    To melt in tints of amethyst
    As evanescent as the mist.

    And now through many a lacey line
    That fairy fingers intertwine
    Upon my mantelpiece at last
    You shed the fragrance of the past;
    A wraith of marshland witchery -
    A floral memory of the sea.




                            THE FINAL ROSE


    From an ember
      bud that glows,
    In September
      flames a rose.

    Bursting prison
      doors of bark,
    Blithely risen
      like a lark.

    Sweetly winging
      to my room,
    Ever singing
      in perfume.

    Tardy comer,
      woodsprite blest,
    Dying summer’s
      last and best!




[Illustration]




                              FAIRY RINGS


    Far and near on every hand
    Fairy rings bedeck the sand,
    Footprints of the sportive elves
    Dancing gaily with themselves;
    Hand in hand and round and round
    Treading circles on the ground
    Nightly, by the glow worm’s ray
    To the cricket’s roundelay.

    Ardently each woodland gnome
    Clasps a fairy from the foam,
    Waltzing till the wondering moon
    Sees each circle as a rune
    In a maze of mystery
    For the puzzled stars to see,
    While the revellers at dawn
    Leave a myriad circles drawn.

    Or perchance the compass grass
    Whirled by wandering airs that pass
    Has engraved those strange designs
    In its circumscribed confines.
    Archimedes never drew
    Circles more exact or true
    Than each needle pointed blade
    Razor edged and green as jade.
    Can we delve the cryptic sense
    From each grooved circumference?
    In the grass that etched those rings
    What immortal spirit springs?
    Or what inspirations stir
    The bewitched geometer
    To such elfin tracery
    On the sands beside the sea?




                              BEACH PLUMS


    How daintily your blossoms cling
    Like memories of winter snows;
    The maiden promises of spring
    That Nature, wakening, bestows;
    White as a bridal veil of gauze
    O’er branches gnarled like eagle’s claws.

    How richly ripe and purple hued
    You lure the eager appetite
    When autumn yields in kindliest mood
    Those luscious globules of delight!
    The sylvan elves must brew that taste
    From sea and dune and scented waste.

    For only skill like theirs could blend
    From woodland wild and rolling brine
    Such flavors. Or perchance they lend
    Their elven powers to those divine
    So that the tang of earth and sky
    Is mingled in their alchemy.

    Or were some darker rites invoked
    Some ritual of the churchman’s hell;
    Malignant imps and beldams cloaked
    In blackness capering neath the spell
    Of gibbous moons obscure and lone -
    Such witchcraft we might yet condone.

    Yes, though we know not whence you came
    Your sweet caresses to the tongue
    Would still delight us just the same
    Whether from day or darkness sprung;
    Content and carefree, from the stems
    To pluck such epicurean gems.




                            ON TRURO HILLS


    Upon those dome like hills of sand
    A wonderous carpet has been laid,
    Rich as the rugs of Samarkand
    And gorgeous as some rare brocade
    Wrought on the looms of far Cathay
    Or by the shrines of Mandalay.

    It covers well those hills of sand
    That glaciers rounded long ago,
    Nor can the dyes of Samarkand
    Display a stranger, deeper glow
    Such tints of red and gray and green
    With gold and amber in between.

    To rolling slopes the lichens cling
    And tufts of bunch grass russet sere,
    Through them the murmurous breezes sing
    While clustering sweet fern, far and near
    Wafts spicy smells like incense o’er
    Those lonely hills from wood to shore

    The wild bearberry shyly twines
    Its sinuous length through grass and moss,
    How glossy are its clinging vines
    From green to rusty red. Across
    Its sheen the sunbeams dreamily
    Play like the waves upon the sea.

    Blueberry clumps in curving lines
    Mingle with waxen bayberry
    To trace their arabesque designs
    On richly wrought embroidery,
    With borders in the marshy sedge
    And fringing beach grass for the edge.

    A treeless waste it seems, but no
    The scrub oak, lichen crusted, cowers
    And dwarf pines, gnarled and twisted, grow
    By beach plum thickets, white with flowers
    A waste that blooms with rarer dyes
    Than jungles turn to tropic skies.

    And there are thread bare patches too
    That add more color to the heath
    For where the texture is worn through
    It shows the golden sands beneath,
    While in the afternoon’s slant rays
    All outlines blur in purple haze.

    Uncanny moorland, desolate
    And in the dusk how weirdly still,
    A landscape one can ne’er forget.
    O’er ghostly hollow wraithlike hill
    What timid moonsprites nightly flee
    The muttering demons of the sea!

    The ebbing seasons merely change
    That coverlet from day to day,
    By shifting, in their varied range
    From sober hues to some more gay,
    While from the sea and sky and air
    Fresh color splashes everywhere.

    That turf rough seeded by the wind
    And nurtured by the pensive sun,
    Is richer than the shawls of Ind,
    Or that famed carpet once begun
    By Jinns and Peris, known of yore,
    That through the air the Genii bore.

    Perhaps on some enchanted breeze
    From Kurdistan or Araby
    Those Genii over unknown seas
    Have borne this priceless tapestry,
    This fabric wrought in Faery land
    To beautify a barren strand.

    ’Tis woven on the loom of time
    Spun from the filaments of dreams,
    This magic carpet. Age nor clime
    Can match its pattern, or the streams
    Of color lavish Nature spills
    O’er Truro’s ancient, windswept hills




                          MY DRIFT WOOD FIRE


    Heap high the wood on my rusty grate
    As I sit enthroned like a potentate
    In my old arm chair, while the crackling blaze
    Unbars the gates, to my dazzled gaze,
    Of a flame bright world that my fancy weaves
    Though the storm may batter the creaking eaves.

    There is Norway pine from the Arctic’s chill
    From wrecks that splintered off Peaked Hill;
    There is stout oak fashioned by broad axe blows,
    And stranger wood that the jungle grows;
    For such is the tribute I levy, - these
    Are the far flung gifts of the seven seas.

    The surf that claws at the wind swept beach
    Like skeleton fingers seems to reach
    For my lonely shelter; but staunch it stands
    Though its walls resound to the rattling sands
    In volleys hurled by the howling blasts; -
    Pile on those staves and that stump of mast!

    Up the roaring chimney the black smoke goes
    But O the glory that ebbs and flows
    On the heat warped ceiling and buckled floor,
    In green and purple; with ruddy ore
    That glints in gold where the salt burns through
    Mid flames that dance in an elfin blue!

    My home may seem but a weathered shack
    Where the cold creeps in through many a crack;
    But my fire’s bright magic has changed all these
    To a castle hall where I take my ease,
    With the window flaunting in sparkling lines
    My royal crest that the frost designs.

    Yes, I am a king carefree and bold
    And I laugh at the gale and the winter’s cold.
    My grate? ’Tis a jewel vault of Ind.
    That music wild? - It is not the wind
    But my minstrel’s songs, for my heart’s desire
    I have found at last in my drift wood fire!




                            THE SAND PIPER


    Quaint manikin, what bids you keep
    Such formal distance with your droll
    Divertisements, the while I stroll
    In solitude beside the deep?

    Your mannerisms first suggest
    A Puritan sedate and prim;
    Then change you by capricious whim
    Into a gnome with hooded crest,

    Or bit of animated foam,
    Or e’en a cloud wisp drifting by, -
    What region in the sea or sky
    Or lonely dune can you call home?

    Your footsteps mincing gleefully
    Thread in and out along the verge
    Embroidering the creamy surge, -
    Strange little old man of the sea!

    But in your antic frolicking,
    Your beak grotesque and solemn eye,
    Your stilt-like legs, your piping cry,
    And sudden ecstasies of wing,

    There is a kinship with the spray
    Wind driven, and the restless sand,
    A mingling of the sea and land,
    The hither and the far away.

    Blithe atomy, bold Nature’s child
    Within you pulses glad and free
    With joyous spontaneity
    The tameless spirit of the wild!




                     THE WHISTLING BUOY OFF NAUSET


    Voice of unutterable woe
      Wailing alone at sea!
    Borne on the shuddering winds that blow
      Out of the dark to me.
        Now far - now near
        To the frightened ear
      Comes that monody wild and free.
    Mingled of menace and grief and fear
      With a maniac chuckle of glee -
            O hear!
      That note of demoniac glee!

    Prophet of peril and storm,
      Harbinger, Triton and brute,
    Mariners peering to glimpse your form
      Cheer at your hoarse salute -
        That gurgling sound
        Of a sob half drowned
      That is vague as the muttering foam!
    Staggering drunkenly to and fro,
      You buffet the tide rips and undertow,
          A fettered gnome
      In the grip of the shoals below.

    Hark to that ominous roar
      Freezing the blood with dread!
    Vampire waves on a spectral shore
      Ravening over the dead.
          O-oo, O-oo!
          Is your wild adieu
      To the souls that the winds have sped!
    Breakers are howling like wolves on the trail,
      Foaming and gnashing and leaping the rail,
        Where a shrieking crew
      Are lost in the maddened gale.

    Wraith of the dangerous seas,
      Haunting the skeleton sands,
    Creature of iron and billow and breeze
      Wrought by a mortal’s hands.
        Your eerie moan
        So weird - so lone
      Is a medley of boding and rapture and groan.
    Roisterer, mourner and demon I wis
      Strangest of beings in ocean’s abyss
              Your elfin cry
      Is a note of its infinite mystery.




                           PEAKED HILL BARS


    On the dread bars at Peaked Hill
    The sullen waves are strangely still;
    And o’er that eerie sand dune’s crest
    The winds, beguiling, seem at rest;
    As the wild flare of Highland Light
    Goes surging up into the night.

    What sinister serenity
    Pervades that graveyard of the sea,
    Where sand bars, white as bone, submerge
    Down where the tides intone a dirge
    For houseless and unhallowed souls -
    ’Tis Death who broods among the shoals!

    For hark, it comes, the thunderous gale
    That makes those dunes and beaches quail,
    As the wild winds and waves embroil
    Those shoals until they seem to boil
    And lift to heaven as loud a din
    As though the fiends were caged within.

    No mariners of old e’er sailed
    More dangerous seas. Charybdis veiled
    No starker terrors than those blue
    And greenish shallows hide from view,
    Where, crouched like tigers on the kill,
    Lurk the dread bars at Peaked Hill!




                    THE RIME OF THE THREE CAPTAINS


    Three captains lounged before the blaze
      Of drift wood burning cheerily,
    And they warmed to ventures of other days
      In salty tales of the sea.

    Tarred were the ropes coiled under the eaves,
      Tar had dripped on the warping floor,
    Beach sand fluttered like withered leaves
      And sifted under the door.

    The salt that crusted the chimney wide
      Had tinged the flames with yellows and reds;
    Salt were the wavelets that lapped outside,
      And white as the salt were their heads.

    Visions of many a tropic clime
      In the firelight seemed to come and go;
    Till friends they had known in their youthful prime
      Took form in the radiant glow.

    As time cracked voices droned away
      Through strange adventures in days gone by,
    One voyaged with them to far Cathay
      And spice swept Araby.

    Quaint were the islands they knew so well
      Zanzibar, Pitcairn, and Celebes;
    Isles enchanted where reigned the spell
      Of other and lonelier seas.

    Seas that cringed at the typhoon’s wrath
      When his thunderous roar was heard;
    Silent seas in the calm of death
      Where never a whisper stirred.

    And the pulses quickened to hear their tales
      of voices hailing from spectral sands;
    Of dead men’s ships with their ghastly sails
      Unfurled by skeleton hands!

    Legends weird of an unplumbed deep
      Where galleons foundered in days of yore;
    And sightless monsters that grope and creep
      In the slime of the ocean floor.

    Sagas of shipwreck in days long gone,
      Of pirate treasure and revelry,
    Of clashing cutlass and fights hard won
      In some blood stained mutiny.

    On decks awash how they held their own
      When faced by the knives of a cursing crew.
    And they spoke of shoals and of ledges lone
      Which only the sea birds knew.

    Youth flushed once more on withered cheeks,
      Bent shoulders squared defiantly,
    At such deeds as fired the warlike Greeks
      In their legended Odyssey.

    And the murmuring tide ebbed once again,
      And the fire burned low e’re the captains three
    Recalled with a sigh they were old, old men
      Who were done with their toil on the sea.




                             STORM SIGNALS


    Red blur against the western sky
    A banner flutters threateningly
    The sport of every treacherous air
    It flaunts its warning note - “Beware”
    Each wrinkle in its protean form
    A portent of impending storm.

    The darkening smudge where sank the sun
    In bloody embers smoulders on
    With brooding wrath. But angrier red
    Invests that standard with the dread
    Of unseen terrors. For it holds
    Death’s shadow in its writhing folds!




                           NEPTUNE’S COURSERS


    Horses of Neptune that bound and dash
    Maddened with fear at the tempest’s lash,
    Pawing the sand with their thudding feet
    In a crashing rhythm of thunderous beat,
    Swift as the startled winds they race,
    Straining ever at fleeter pace;
    Forms that curve where the billows comb,
    Breasting a welter of seething foam,
    What unseen riders spur them on
    In a fierce stampede to be up and gone?
    Out of the hoary deep they come,
    Surging on with a booming roar,
    Pounding ever along the shore,
    Till the senses whirl and the ear grows numb.

    Manes that stream in the wind swept spume,
    Necks that arch in the breakers’ crest,
    Hoofs resounding like drums of doom,
    Rearing forward with frantic zest,
    Wild are the steeds of the storm scarred deep!
    Trident driven, they plunge and leap,
    With nostrils spread and their eyes aglow,
    And fetlocks gripped by the undertow,
    Boisterous, raging, uncanny steeds
    Out of an ocean waste that breeds
    Chargers fit for a sea god’s needs -
    Neptune’s coursers, untamed and free,
    Fleeing the wrath of the unknown sea!




                     TO A SPIDER WEB WET WITH DEW


    Suspended o’er the grass there floats a web
    More delicate than strands of gossamer
    Wet with the morning dew, in pendant gems
    That flame with reds and greens and darting blues
    From the bright sun. A filmy nothingness
    Made visible by jeweled drops and etched,
    Like frosted silver, on a background dark
    Of drooping pines. An airy talisman
    As lustrous as a diamond necklace draped
    About a Peri’s throat. What fleeting glimpse
    Of loveliness ethereal and unreal
    Inspired that rapt enchantment of design,
    That harp of strings attuned to elfin songs,
    That ladder for the moonsprites nightly trail
    From sky to earth. What miracle of line,
    What shimmering grace, what witchery of form!
    So fragile that a fallen leaf may rend
    Its warp of magic ne’er to know the woof
    Of hard reality. A diagram
    Of elfin tracery impalpable;
    Each angle and its intersections squared
    By that grotesque geometer who spins
    Unseen, a hateful spider, ogre grim
    To all the insect world. Can ugliness
    So venomous create a thing so fair
    Beyond the range of art? In pensive mood
    We pause a moment to admire and scan
    Its meaning. Can such fairy elegance
    Spring from so foul a source? Yet legends tell
    How crippled Vulcan, grimed with dust and smoke,
    In darkness wrought the glorious shield of Mars.
    The water lily, blossom honey sweet,
    Draws nectar from the mire. Nor time nor bounds
    May curb that hidden beauty that wells up
    From secret springs in nooks obscure and dark,
    Till gems of dew upon a spider’s web
    Glow like the Pleiades in frosted skies.




[Illustration]




                               THE DUNES


    The dunes, the silent sentinels of the land
      That range along the lea,
    In revery unbroken, there they stand
      And gaze far out to sea

    Across their wind swept crests the breezes play
      In cadence sad and sweet,
    The restless sands whip ever day by day
      Their surf tormented feet.

    The dying sunbeams gild their crags with gold
      Then purple into night,
    Around their slopes the elves of twilight fold
      A film of spectral light.

    A landscape wild that one might see in dreams
      Or on the pallid moon,
    Blue shadows traced in silver by her beams
      In many a cryptic rune.

    Or etched against the winter sky they show
      An outline weird and stark,
    Their pale sands melting like the sparser snow
      Into a background dark.

    With scudding clouds, reflected on the dull
      Gray mirror of the sea.
    Cut by the wing points of a lonely gull
      In poised expectancy.

    The distant sand bars mark the skeletons
      Of other vanished dunes,
    Their crests were once upreared to other suns
      And other ghostly moons.

    The seething shoals once foamed beneath your feet
      And maddened tide rips swirled
    Whence risen proudly you can stand and greet
      The older, firmer world.

    Unstable element of shifting sand
      Whose contours ever change,
    But moulded by great nature’s groping hand
      In shapes bizarre and strange.

    We too, from sand have fashioned castled towers
      For waves to wash away,
    But her creations crumble much like ours
      Though in a grander way.

    Nature, like man, forever vainly strives
      To conquer time and tide;
    She toils long aeons, we our briefer lives
      And both unsatisfied!




                     THE FLIGHT OF THE WILD GEESE


    Out of the sky they call to me
    Honking geese in the far flung V
    Of an angle traced on the filmy skies
    As they float along, and their plaintive cries
    Are the pipes of an elfin roundelay.
    Tis the call of the wild to the Far-away!

    “Northward Ho!” is their haunting chant
    Down the rocking winds their long lines slant,
    And the old gray gander who takes command
    How he marshals the files of his climbing band,
    As they wing their flight with a tireless haste,
    To the ice rimmed seas and the tundra waste.

    To the spruce fringed lakes and the virgin sod
    Where never the foot of man has trod;
    To the empty lands unspoiled and clean
    That never the eye of man has seen;
    Where the frost wraiths flee in the melting nights
    That throb to the dance of the northern lights.

    On their venturous voyage no compass guides
    Through the murmuring reefs and the chartless tides
    Of the upper air. But their leader hoarse,
    Like a pilot sage directs their course
    To the sheltered fens and the coves they share
    With the snow white fox and the arctic hare.

    How we follow the wild geese’s homing flight
    Till their chorus dies and they fade from sight,
    And our pulses thrill to be up and away
    Joyously buoyant, as free as they.
    For their far off challenge seems to ring
    “Awake, glad world, to the songs of Spring!”




                              SWEET FERN


    Strange perfume of the wilderness,
    Elusive as an elfin child
    That broods above the landscape wild -
    And haunting as a last caress.

    From thickets broken and obscure
    That spicy fragrance down the lea,
    Brings to the ever murmuring sea
    The sweetness of the barren moor.

    Low risen thickets, scarcely seen
    Among the clumps of reindeer moss;
    What elfin traceries emboss
    Your leafy arabesques of green!

    And if no lonely passer by
    Has trod your solitude to share
    That incense - every wandering air
    Has borne it to the bending sky.




                              WHITE SAIL


    White sail beyond yon point of sand
    Set like a gem upon the blue,
    A fairy bark for elfin land
    Receding gradually from view;

    White sail a snow flake come to rest
    Like thistledown, upon the sea;
    A distant beacon on the breast
    Of watery immensity.

    White sail, a finger tip that seems
    To beckon from the ocean’s rim,
    To some enchanted isle of dreams
    Beyond the skyline, vague and dim.

    White sail that like a lonely tern
    Fades out against the dying day,
    We watch till you are gone and yearn
    To voyage into the far away.




                           THE HUMMING BIRD


    Blithe wanderer from some happier sphere
    What hither darting brought you here
        Swift as a flash of light,
    With rainbow spatters on your throat
    Aflutter like a dancing mote
        Upon a sunbeam bright.

    Bold atom of exultant life
    With energy and action rife
        And pinions all ablurr,
    What glad exuberance of wing
    Like harping on a fairy string
        Evokes that vibrant whirr?

    With humming, strumming melody
    Like some supernal bumble bee
        You flit about to sup
    On honey dew. Your fearless beak
    Probes, lancet like, those sweets to seek
        Within each nectared cup.

    Ah birdikin, now here, now there,
    Poised elfinlike, upon the air
        Aglitter like the dawn,
    How ardently we would beguile
    So fair a sprite to rest a while
        But flash! and you are gone.

    Yet the unspoken word you bring
    Still lingers. Time is on the wing
        And never may be stayed.
    So let us sip each honeyed hour
    For life itself is but a flower
        That all too soon will fade.




                   O ROAD THAT WINDS AMONG THE HILLS


    O road that winds among the hills
    With sinuous curves that lure the eye
    Up distant slopes to meet the sky,
    And wake a wanderlust that thrills
    To scenes which beckon far beyond
    From steep Kashmir or Trebizon.

    How like a bird, we’d love to roam
    Beyond the gray Horizon’s rim
    That shuts us like a prison grim
    Within that narrow niche - our home
    While thoughts unfettered steal away
    To Istanbul and far Cathay.

    O road we tread in toil and strife
    That climbs to greet the bending air,
    The long, long trail to none knows where -
    The weary highway we call Life -
    What lies beyond? Ah, who can say
    But we shall see and know - some day!




                       THE BEACH GRASS THRENODY


    Lo in the wind the beach grass sings
    A medley of fantastic things
    That stirs the silence of the ear
    With elfin notes we scarce may hear,
    From formless shapes grotesque and strange
    That lurk beyond the vision’s range.

    The fingers of what moon beam sprite,
    Or lonely demon of the night,
    Have strummed those sweetly plaintive strings
    To the weird melody that wrings
    A note of haunting mystery
    From the chill vastness of the sea.




                             TO A ROSE JAR


    Fair chalice in your spicy store
      The roses seem to blow
    And childhood’s simple faith restore
      In legend’s long ago;
    Such as the Arab’s jewelled prose
    Where Genii from the bottle rose
    The magician’s command obeyed
    And at his feet whole kingdoms laid.

    From odorous depths I summon thee
      O spirit of the past!
    Weave all your spells of fantasy
      And may your visions last.
    Bring to my ear the murmuring breeze
    The drowsy, far off hum of bees,
    Unfolding to my raptured gaze
    Those scenes beloved, of olden days.

    Once more within this scented gloom
      Forgotten sunbeams rest
    On hedges drooped with odorous bloom
      By blushing lips caressed.
    Those roses faded with the dusk -
    Her lips grew cold, but fixed in musk
    The fragrance lingers - and her eyes
    Do they smile down from Paradise?

    Prophetic incense, subtly rare,
      O may I understand
    The poignant messages you bear
      From Memory’s holy land
    For petals torn from withered stems
    Have filled this treasure casque with gems
    And their sweet perfume brings to me
    A hint of immortality.




                             BLUE BERRIES


    From elfland’s glades and coverts green
    Peering through bars of sun and shade
    Are friendly little eyes, I ween,
    That glow like sapphires set in jade,
    And shyly veil their azure spheres
    In summer’s filmiest atmospheres.

    There banqueting, we half recline
    And sip the perfume redolent
    With sweet fern, aromatic pine,
    And bayberries’ seductive scent,
    An incense rare as smoking spice
    That censers raise to Paradise.

    The stillness brooding like a pall
    O’er thickets and entangled trees
    Is stabbed by the shrill blackbird’s call,
    And rippled by the wandering breeze
    That trails a buzzing dragon fly
    Where bumble bees hum drowsily.

    Athwart the slant rays of the sun
    Far off there glides a cloudland sail
    To faery shores. Our task is done -
    Our treasure won - a brimming pail.
    And no blithe argonaut e’er bore
    From legend’s quest a richer store!




                              THE WATCHER


    A frail old lady bent and gray
    She gazes out into the west.
    To her it seems but yesterday
    He sailed away with eager zest
    “I pinned a rose upon his coat”
    She falters, clutching at her throat.

    A mariner he put to sea,
    Twas more than fifty years ago,
    The neighbors nod in sympathy,
    She cannot understand they know.
    What fancies throng her poor old head
    “My Robert lost? He can’t be dead.”

    And she is right. Her clearer eye
    Sees through the storms and stress of years,
    Full well she knows he did not die
    The rainbow glistens through her tears
    Enshrined within her heart in truth

    Her Robert lives in deathless youth.
    From her lone window on the shore
    She nightly sets a lamp to burn
    A beacon when the breakers roar
    To guide him on his safe return.
    No matter what the neighbors say
    These two shall meet again some day!




                          THE SEA SHELL BOAT


    How now, little maid, in your bonnet arrayed
      With that quaint little shell in your hand!
    Not a shell but a boat? Ah, I see, let it float
      Far away from these mountains of sand.

    It will sail so I’m told, down the pathway of gold
      Where the sun paves the sea with its beams,
    To some fortunate isle where the skies ever smile
      Upon childhood’s endeavors and dreams.

    But, Honey, don’t cry if it sinks bye and bye
      Like a fluttering bird to its nest;
    For the wild waves at play in their blundering way,
      Like the oncoming years never rest.

    My hopes were aglow in the long, long ago
      When my own little ship left the shore;
    But my hair has grown grey since it drifted away
      And it never came back any more!




[Illustration]




                                FLOTSAM


    O flotsam stranded on the beach
    Half buried in the oozing sand,
    A sudden step, an outstretched hand,
    And you are snatched beyond the reach
    Of clutching waves. What brought you here
    From far off climes beyond the seas,
    The sport of every furtive breeze,
    A wanderer for many a year?

    What gulfs of ocean’s nether world
    Your paths have plumbed, I cannot know,
    To what abyss the Krakens go,
    Or where Leviathan was hurled.
    What current dark, I wonder, links
    Your lot with mine on this lone shore, -
    But there is only silence more
    Unbroken than the Memphian spinx.

    And am I fain to speculate
    Upon the burden of your past?
    When I, myself, am flotsam cast
    Ashore a little while to wait
    For Time’s resistless tides that sweep
    In endless waves of night and day
    Across the shoaling milky way
    From some vast, unimagined deep!




                         THE ANCIENT LOG BOOK


    ’Tis a time eaten volume with pages so blurred
    That they seem to peer out through a fog,
    But our fancy illumines each lustreless word
    Of that battered old “wind-jammer’s” log.

    Till our eyes gazing out through those angular lines
    Like windows, transparent, behold
    Far vistas of seas where adventure combines
    With “spices” and “teak wood” and “gold.”

    “Off the Horn” where the “greybeards” loomed up “mountain high”
    All “our topsails were carried away”;
    Then ’twas “cutlass and pike” when the “pirates drew nigh”
    As “becalmed off Macassar we lay.”

    “One man hurt” then a later notation, “he’s dead”
    And “was buried at sea” all we know,
    He “signed from Tahiti” a “good man” they said,
    “The fo’castle hands called him ‘Joe’”

    Lone wanderer far from his native lagoon
    Was he mourned by some garlanded maid?
    We ponder till jarred by a “roaring Typhoon”
    And “there on our beam ends we laid”.

    “With our water casks low” when our “Bread had give out”
    “We fetched by some island unknown”
    Though we “dragged on the coral” while “Going about”
    We added “their stores” to our own.

    There’s the wash and the surge of the murmurous deep
    In each billowing flourish of ink.
    Though the captains are silent in fathomless sleep
    What they tersely inscribed is a link.

    With a past, when our banner, its glory aflame
    To the winds of the heavens was flung;
    And their deeds are forever an epic of fame
    Such as Homer of old might have sung.




                      THE DANCE OF THE MOON BEAMS


    O the moonbeams dance down the broad expanse
    Of a path o’er the heaving sea,
    And they blithely trip from tip to tip
    Of the billows ranging free.

    Down a highway bright of silvery light
    They dance to the ghostly moon,
    In the sprightly set of a minuet
    And the whirl of a rigadoon.

    To our lonely shore like a burnished floor
    Streams that river of luminous sheen;
    ’Tis a fairy track through the shadows black
    ’Tis a bridge that spans between.

    The regions here and that unseen sphere
    Far off in the western sky,
    Where the day is done with the setting sun
    And the sunsets fade and die.

    Where the moon holds court and her minions sport
    As over the seas they roam,
    And they dance their way through the glistening spray
    And laugh in the rippling foam.

    “O the night is ours and its witching powers
    “And there’s never an eye to mark,
    “For the demons sleep in the caverned deep
    “And the goblins of the dark.

    “Are far away where the shadows gray
    “On the spectral sand dunes lie,
    “So join in our mirth that is not of the earth
    “But more of the sea and the sky!”

    To the rhythmic beat of their twinkling feet
    The creaming breakers fret,
    As to and fro on a rollicking toe
    They gracefully pirouette.

    For the surges roll o’er the murmuring shoal
    Through a brooding harmony
    And the night wind sings of unspoken things
    In an eerie melody.

    “O cast your cares on the buoyant airs
    “Where the star points smoulder dim”
    Is their lilting song as they float along
    To the skyline’s molten rim.

    As their footsteps pave o’er the frosted wave
    A path to the magic west,
    With a carefree shout we would join the rout
    And follow their homing quest.

    But our feet are banned from that faery land
    Though our vaulting fancy yearns
    As it throbs in tune to the dying moon
    Till the morning redly burns.

    With our hearts in tune to the dying moon
    We stand in the hush of dawn;
    There are cryptic runes on the windswept dunes
    But that luminous path has gone.

    And the wet sands lie neath the empty sky
    As drear as the lifeless sea,
    But through our dreams flit the elfin beams
    Of that moonsprite revelry.




                          MARSHES OF SANDWICH


    Marshes of Sandwich where slow currents wind
      Languidly seeking the outermost sea
    Drifting, some ultimate haven to find,
      Where far horizons stretch, boundless and free!

    Out there beyond the white sea wall of dunes,
      Murmurs of ocean that breathe faint and low
    Looming like mountain peaks crusted with snow
      Weaving blue shadows through hot afternoons.

    Languorous meadows where dragon flies dream,
      Level green solitudes soothing the eye,
    Golden with mist from the sun’s slanting beam
      Purpled by patches of cloud floating by.

    Prairies beloved of the homing wild geese
      Nature’s hurt children are healed by your balm;
    How we have longed for the infinite peace
      Born of your timeless, unchangeable calm!




                         THE SMILE OF THE SEA


    O the sun’s molten gold seems to spatter and spill
      O’er the wavelets so dazzlingly bright,
    As they dance to the songs of the sandpiper’s shrill
      With their numberless sparkles of light.

    For the languorous winds with their deft fingers press
      Those wrinkles of sapphire and flame,
    And the fires they enkindle all surge to express
      A shout of exultant acclaim.

    How they twinkle and glitter like sparks from the steel
      While the gilded foam chuckles with glee,
    Till all nature, attuned to the rapture they feel
      Seems aglow with the smile of the sea.




[Illustration]




                           OUR CAPE COD HOME


    O ancient Cape Cod house whose drooping eaves
    Prim as the bonnet of a Pilgrim maid
    Are sere and grey as Autumn’s driven leaves,
    What comfort seems to drowse beneath their shade
    Comfort that fairly drips like Heaven’s own dew -
    The tranquil calm that our forefathers knew.

    How many gales about those eaves have roared,
    How many summer heats have come and gone,
    And left their imprint on each weathered board
    Time seasoned and discolored, handed on
    To younger generations. Quaint and queer
    You seem, but O your wealth of homey cheer!

    Your architects were of a sombre breed,
    Their doctrines gnarled and knotty to the core,
    And yet you gave them refuge, ’twas their need;
    What battlemented towers had yielded more?
    A treasure galleon, in your roomy hold
    Were sanctuary from the storm and cold.

    And beauty thralled them too, those builders dour,
    Though beauty was to them, sedate and plain;
    They wrought in harmony with marsh and moor
    In simple lines, and time’s enduring stain
    On crumbling shingles, where the lichens grow
    To mingle with the greys their golden glow.

    With broad axe and with adze those builders wrought
    And in the wilderness foundations laid
    For our great nation. Liberty they sought
    With toil and thrift - sound virtues roughly made
    Of homespun stuff, quite like the clothes they wore
    As out of fashion as your buckled floor!

    The times were hard, the men who lived them rude,
    They lacked the many luxuries we know;
    The life within your walls was drab and crude,
    At least our demagogues have told us so;
    And yet along your pathway rimmed with flowers
    How shallow flows this flippant life of ours!

    The new apartment in the city’s maze
    Has fixtures that your age had never seen,
    Machine made gadgets, till our very days
    Seem spun for us, upon a vast machine;
    And we ourselves an inconspicuous part
    Of some grim Frankenstein without a heart.

    Caught in the maelstrom of the times we strive
    To please our gods of gold with feet of clay;
    Exchange your solace for a noisy hive;
    Clutch at the shell and throw the pearl away;
    And your unbounded views of ocean’s foam
    Shut out with walls that never can be home.

    O quaint old Cape Cod house, precarious link
    Between the past and present, Life, no doubt,
    Means progress, - so at least we’re taught to think
    Though often wonder what ’tis all about -
    But as we smile at customs you have known
    How are the angels saddened at our own!




                     THUNDER STORM OFF RACE POINT


    Beyond the dunes what monstrous shapes are these
    Like Titans rearing out of the abyss
    To menace heaven? Terrible they loom
    Upheaving with their shoulders till the sky
    Is warped and yielding, and the trampled sea
    Pales into death white foam. Impending doom
    Sweeps to engulf the world, when flash on flash,
    As far heat lightnings glint on burnished arms,
    The wild Valkyries come! Their jet black steeds
    Outpace the furious winds; and hark, the stroke
    Of Thor, the Thunder God! His hammer dread
    Splinters the silence, crashing downward, stuns
    The firmament. That glare that blinds the eye
    Is Woden’s Sword! It pierces coil on coil
    Night’s writing dragon, pouring forth its flood
    Of venomed gloom.
                      Redoubled is the din
    The powers of Tartarus and Heaven locked,
    In mortal strife. The adamantine base
    Foundationing the everlasting hills,
    And the resounding archways of the sky,
    Reverberate and tremble!
                                Wildly burst
    Like pent up tears, the rains that hurtle down
    Sodden with chill; while whimpering, the surge
    All tempest frayed and besomed, choked with sobs,
    Fingers the whining sands.
                                Ages it seems,
    Tumultuous aeons, e’er the torrents cease
    And tides of blackness ebb. Far out to sea
    The mighty conflict drifts, the thunders die
    As scorpion whips of forked lightnings scourge
    The cringing giants of the cloud that flee
    Down to their dungeons in the vasty deep;
    While o’er their tatters rides the full orbed moon
    Glorious, resplendent like the shield of Mars,
    Triumphant o’er the terrors of the storm.




                    TO A SCRIMSHAWED WHALE’S TOOTH


    Quaint relic that the mellowing years
    Have tinged with Autumn’s ripened gold,
    What scene of olden time veneers
    Your ivory surface smooth and cold!
    Hard bitten by some huge sperm whale
    You often gored the giant squid,
    That nightmare of the deep, amid
    Unfathomed gulfs of crag and vale.

    Remotest seas, their bounds unknown,
    That old bull whale was wont to cross
    By ways uncharted, he alone,
    Shared with the wandering albatross.
    Marauder savage and morose,
    He spurned the waves in pride and wrath,
    No killer dared dispute the path
    The monarch of the ocean chose.

    Then came the whaler’s crew - and this
    Lone carven fragment now remains
    Of all his bulk, that the abyss
    Long since engulfed. Yet it explains
    A graphic story. Clothed with life
    Its dead white surface - line by line -
    Unfolds in intricate design
    A sailor’s dreams - etched by his knife.

    Through many an hour of summer haze
    While the long swells rocked languidly
    His patient fingers graved that maze
    Of intertwining tracery.
    And that sweet face with hair so trim,
    Love’s arrow, and two hearts that bleed,
    What touching romance we may read
    In “H to J” - to Her from Him.

    Old Time united them we trust -
    Initials linked but separate -
    Though both long mingled with the dust
    Their story we may still translate
    From this rude sketch. Devotedly
    They passed a lifetime richly blest
    And safe at home, together rest
    In sad, sweet graves beside the sea.

    Or did perchance, Fate intervene
    To bow that head in sorrow low
    For lover lost - what came between
    Those twain we cannot hope to know.
    The sadness of a far off day
    The fading of a golden dream
    Dim memories, how fresh they seem
    To ever youthful H and J!

    Enshrined as on a magic page
    A clasp knife for his only aid,
    Still fondly lingers age by age
    The love a sailor bore a maid.
    His name, nor hers, no one can say,
    No evidence besides, endures,
    But silent eloquence like yours
    Immortalizes H and J!




                           THE CREEPING FOG


    Rolling in from the sea, rolling on
    Ghostly floods chill as death, in the dawn
    Swallow up all the world in their sweep
    As the grey currents stealthily creep
    Over marshland and dune, while the sun
    Dripping mist, scarce proclaims day begun
    To a landscape all eerie and wan
    Drowned in fog, rolling in, rolling on!

    Trees by oceans of droplets bedimmed
    Loom like shapes that our fancy has limned;
    Beacons set where the weird torrents range
    Through invisible channels and change
    All the loved, olden landmarks we know,
    Till dissolved in that strange overflow
    Earth and sky seem to blend and begin
    In the fog’s swelling tide, rolling in!




                             WOODEN SAILOR


    Wooden sailor swinging war clubs
    On my lawn with furious tempo,
    Like the Don of Spanish legend
    He of old, who braved the windmills
    Looming up like giants, charged them
    Splintering his lance and bruising
    His frail bones on mad illusions;
    You resemble him - bold warrior,
    Struggling with the summer breezes,
    Lunging at the clouds above you.

    But your ludicrous gyrations
    In my yard, your droll gymnastics
    Point a world of deeper meaning,
    For we too, are often harried
    By imaginary perils;
    Spend the years in aimless striving
    Wearying the heart and sinews
    On fantastic undertakings;
    Cursed by impotent endeavor
    Unproductive, never-ending.

    If we smile at your contortions
    Toiling furiously for - nothing
    It is less in mirth than sadness.
    For I fear we fail to equal
    Your stout heart and resolution
    Wigwagging your bold defiance.
    Yes, while we are battling shadows,
    Wasting life in futile effort,
    Can we wonder that the angels
    Grieve in Heaven at our folly?




                              THE DREAMER


    He lounges on the wharf and whittles pegs
    While his pathetic gaze drifts out to sea,
    Around him fishnets, anchors, empty kegs
    And coils of rope are stored. His revery
    Though deep, is sometimes broken by a sigh
    As strange lights kindle in his faded eye.

    A shapeless hat seems floating on his hair
    Of wavy white. His clothes are patched and worn
    His fingers palsy shaken, and an air
    Of pathos and of helplessness forlorn
    Enfolds him, as he lays his pipe aside
    And gazes sadly at the ebbing tide.

    His vision seems athirst to drink its fill
    Of ocean’s mystery that he loves so well,
    For he has lived adventure, lives it still,
    Though age, long since, has yielded to the spell
    Of brooding calm. No idle dreamer he,
    His thoughts are busied on some far off sea.

    Stern old Magellan and Sir Francis Drake
    Heard tales from just such ancient sailor men,
    Tales that inspired a zeal to undertake
    Those stirring voyages beyond the ken
    Of their small world. Discoverers bold, - and yet
    They steered the course some unknown dreamer set!




                      THE CHANT OF THE NIGHT WIND


    O the wind in the chimney place thrums a wild strain
      A chant that no mortal has known,
    And my soul deeply stirs at its eerie refrain
      In my dim lighted chamber, - alone.

    For strange lifting cadences mark its sweet song
      With gladness and beauty and fear,
    Till chords, long forgotten, in memory throng
      Like a shell that I press to my ear.

    O where have you wandered, melodious breeze
      That sounds such a magical note,
    Have you winged on your journey, o’er limitless seas
      From some Ultima Thule remote?

    A region no mortal may ever explore
      Whose legended boundaries lie
    On foam whitened beaches and sinister shore
      And crags that are gnashing the sky!

    Where ice fields aglow in the dark of the moon
      Reflect the volcano’s red glare -
    We may ponder and doubt - but our souls are in tune
      To the verve of that uncanny air!

    For the spirits of night strum their wild elfin lyres
      And they harp on invisible strings,
    While a music, unearthly, floats down from those wires
      Like the tremulous flutter of wings.

    For those notes so elusive, so mystically sweet,
      We may sense but their vague undertone,
    For they baffle our hearing, so faintly they beat
      On the verge of the audible zone.

    O restless and fitful, those wandering airs,
      As the sad breezes sigh to the rain,
    Then dying, evasively mock at our prayers,
      For silent, we hear them again!

    ’Tis the music of elfland that rings in our ears
      With its haunting notes witching and low,
    Like the voices of friends that have gone with the years
      Or the echoes of songs long ago.




                               MIDNIGHT


    In the dead watches of the night
    As time drifts by on endless flight,
    Drowsing upon our couch we hear
    A distant clock sound faint but clear,
    And chiming from its lonely tower
    Ring out the solemn midnight hour.

    That warning stirs the unquiet air
    A golden day has flown - but where?
    Another burns to greet the dawn
    But one day has forever gone -
    And pendulum and iron tongue
    Their mournful requiem have sung.

    Aghast the present moment flies
    Midway between eternities,
    As, winging on without a stay
    Tomorrow flees from yesterday,
    And vanished moments that have been
    Will never come to us again!




                            THE GOLDEN ROD


    What dazzling shape is this that seems to rise
      At the command
    Of some magician, till it glorifies
      The barren sand?

    A stately canopy for some proud elve!
      And that rich sheen
    The grand creation of the gnomes that delve
      Grotesque, unseen,

    In caverns dim. There while the forges ring
      To blow on blow
    Those humble artisans are burnishing
      That wondrous glow!

    How gorgeously the molten yellow gleams
      As they combine
    The sand’s bright ore with sunlight’s minted beams
      In rare design.

    Until the wealth that jade green leaves disguise
      And buds enfold!
    Wells upward with resplendent ecstasies
      In jets of gold!

    Fountains that o’er the sterile desert play
      Erect and tall
    With pendent droplets from their golden spray
      That never fall.

    Oases of enchantment where the bees
      And beetles come,
    To mingle with the murmur of the seas
      Their drowsy hum.

    Such splendor glitters in each regal nod
      Of gilded bloom
    We pause in doubt; is this the golden rod,
      Or seraph’s plume?

    A scepter, or perchance a magic wand
      For elfin kings?
    Our fancy pictures in each jewelled frond
      Fantastic things.

    And still our wonder grows, and a vague fear
      Of regions banned
    Steals o’er us--lest our footsteps draw too near
      To fairyland!




                              WILD ROSES


    Whence comes that swooning fragrance on the air
    That riot of rich color on the hill
    Like smouldering embers? red, deep red, and fair
    They are, beyond our groping words. We thrill
    To inner surgings of unuttered things
    When we behold, strewn o’er this alien lea
    Exotic bloom that to our spirit sings
    In perfume sweet as lifting melody,
    Fresh from immortal Eden’s radiant bowers
    Where angels coveted our earthly flowers.

    Like elfin torches tipped with odorous fire
    Raining their ashen petals on the grass,
    These flowering censers rouse a wild desire
    For beauty yet unseen, in those who pass
    This solitary way. O incense sweet!
    The bees are drunken with it, the wild bees
    And dragon flies that hunt this still retreat
    Far from the world of men. Is it for these
    That Nature lavishes her perfume rare
    To scent this moorland waste and wandering air?

    Wild roses, O but they were meant to be
    More than the sweet companions of an hour;
    Theirs is a loftier role, their destiny
    In this sad world, to glorify the power
    Of beauty welling up beyond the range
    Of mortal view. Strange ecstasies concealed
    Aforetime from our blighting frost and change
    Aurora’s swinging gates have here revealed;
    Such perfect beauty as the seraph knows
    Hid in that floral miracle - a rose.




                        THE COAST GUARD STATION


    Stout fortress on the battle line
    Of shrieking winds and thunderous surge,
    A barbican against the brine,
    A challenge to the breakers’ dirge;
    Not all the wild Atlantic’s wrath
    Can bar your men from life boats frail,
    Nor all the fury of the gale
    Can swerve them from their destined path!

    The churning foam may pelt and freeze,
    The stinging sleet cut to the bone,
    They venture forth on perilous seas,
    They venture forth, unsung, alone.
    Like knights of olden time arrayed
    In oilskin armor, theirs the role
    To battle with the raging shoal
    And beard the tempest unafraid!

    No martial strains ring in their ears,
    No banners blaze their desperate way;
    Only a wife or mother peers
    From distant sand dunes through the spray.
    And yet no crown that fame may give
    Can e’re transcend the solemn pride
    Of men, whatever may betide,
    Who risk their lives that men may live.




                          KEEPER OF THE LIGHT


    Aloft within the beacon tower alone
    She trims the lamps that send their luminous beams
    Far out into the night. The eerie moan
    Of the wild shoal is smothered by the screams
    Of winds that make the thrumming walls resound
    With deafening din. She listens, mute with dread,
    To voices mingling vaguely in the sound
    Of the storm maddened waves, and shakes her head.
    “Is it the waves?” she mutters. Bent and old
    Her fingers tremble so,--but not from cold!

    Her husband tosses on his cot below
    Burning with fever, often calls her name.
    But she must stand his watch though none may know
    Of her long vigil. Vestal of a flame
    Whose warning beams guide mariners aright
    Mid perilous reefs, through all engulfing gloom
    Though unclean spirits rage throughout the night
    Riding the furious winds in rain and spume,
    No matter if she shivers and turns pale,
    Her courage, like her light, endures the gale.

    But what drives hard like spray against the glass
    Hurtling from out the dark? a tiny form
    With battered wings, a tern which flees, alas,
    Like some lost soul from the pursuing storm
    Dashed to the rocks below. “Dear God!” she cries
    “Why must my light that points great ships the way
    “Be blooded by his piteous sacrifice?
    “Life saving beams, who gave them power to slay?
    “How hopelessly must good and evil blend
    “When harmless birds meet such a cruel end.”




                            ON CHATHAM BARS


    On Chatham bars the surges moan
      And sea birds cry;
    A gull goes winging stark and lone
      Across the sky;
    While on the shore, with menace low,
    Mutters the seething undertow.

    O’er Chatham bars a frighted cloud
      Goes driven fast;
    The shoals are answering hoarse and loud
      The roaring blast,
    And joining that wild revelry
    Of frenzied winds and raging sea.

    Through blinding sands with bended head
      The coast guard goes
    By Chatham bars, in silent dread
      For well he knows,
    That surf may leave, on its retreat,
    Some ghastly trophy at his feet!

    On Easter morn the mourners stand
      On Chatham hill,
    To chant again His high command,
      Of - “Peace be still”
    And scatter flowers upon the wave
    To drift above some nameless grave.

    For Chatham bars are silent now
      On Easter Day,
    Before that solemn group who bow
      Their heads and pray
    To Him, the Risen One, Who said,
    “Then shall the sea give up its dead.”




                        THE OLD TIMER’S LAMENT


    O where is the Cape that I used to know
    In the quaint old days of the long ago?
    The weathered house with its friendly smoke
    From the looming background of silver oak;
    And the huge brick oven that flanked the grate
    Where the fireplace yawned like the flaming gate
    Of a fairy world to my childish gaze
    While the russets sputtered before the blaze--
    Was there ever such comfort and homey cheer
    As the Cape that my memory holds so dear?

    There were braided rugs on the sanded floor
    And that queer round cellar--what bounteous store
    Of pickle and relish and sweet preserve
    Seemed overflowing each ample curve!
    What jars of berries and stewed beach plum
    And jugs--half hidden--of cherry rum--
    And jugs that frothed with potato yeast,
    And the dainties saved for Thanksgiving’s feast
    I think of them often and sigh--“Heigh-ho”
    O where is the Cape that I used to know?

    And that open chamber and corded bed
    Where I listened to pattering rain overhead.
    Rope handled sea chests and leathern trunks
    And models of clippers and Chinese junks,
    And apples drying in clustered strings
    With numberless other wonderful things.
    No cave from the storied Arabian Nights
    Was filled with more treasures and marvelous sights
    Than our storehouse under the eaves could show--
    O where is the Cape that I used to know?

    And the fragrant gardens that memory links
    With the olden days--O those sweet Cape pinks,
    And the hollyhocks and the columbine,
    And the savory herbs by the ivy vine,
    With the fish nets drying along the slope
    Mid tangles of buoys and fresh tarred rope--
    Yes the modern gardens are trim and neat
    But I often think--“Do they smell as sweet
    “As those beds where the roses loved to grow?”
    O where is the Cape that I used to know?

    The captains turned from the seven seas
    To end their days in such homes as these;
    And the tales they spun for my youthful ear
    I have waited a lifetime their like to hear.
    But they sleep where the mournful willows bend
    O’er that silent city where voyages end;
    Though their memory lingers in many a page
    Of log books crumbling with salt and age,
    And many a rare old curio--
    O where is the Cape that I used to know?

    But time flows on like the ceaseless tide
    And cabins clutter the country side
    Like nesting gulls. Where the horse, hock deep,
    Once plodded the sands the autos sweep
    Before my eyes in a dizzy blur
    Of mad confusion and noise and stir.
    For peace and quiet have never a place
    In this modern world with its feverish pace

    With its movie glare and its radio--
    O where is the Cape that I used to know?




                                REVERY


    Sweet angel of the backward look
      And trailing wings,
    We wander by Time’s restless brook
      Of transient things
    That from some far off, unseen nook
      Forever springs.

    Old Time may lay aside his glass
      For just a day,
    Let not the jewelled moments pass
      But bid them stay,
    The while we stretch upon the grass
      In revery.




[Illustration]




                             THE OLD HULK


        Moored to the decaying piling
        Of a ruined wharf, and whiling
    Endless hours away in dreams of days gone by,
        Lies a battered hulk, dismasted,
        Broken backed and tempest blasted,
    Like a dolphin fast aground and left to die.

        Deck awash and planking slanted
        Like a broken lily planted
    In the mud, where every tide the eddies swirl,
        Years have gone since last it floated
        And the sea growths all unnoted,
    Underneath its rotting timbers twine and curl.

        Often when my footsteps tended
        To that lonely shore that ended
    All its voyagings there sounded in my ear,
        What the shrilling sea birds uttered
        And the voiceless current muttered
    Solemn messages it meant for me to hear;

        “Far off seas no more beguile me
        “But their memories reconcile me
    “To the shelter of this silver mirrored cove
        “Where my outline seems engraven
        “Like an etching. Safe in haven
    “I am home at last, and nevermore shall rove.”




                            THE MODERNISTS


    Bam, wham!
    Clangor of cymbals and shriek of a fife,
    That stabs like a knife.
    Zam, slam!
    Bang on the tambourine, beat on the drums,
    Symphony comes!
    Greet her with tom-toms while savages dance,
    Let any discord the riot enhance,
    Down with all melody, harmony, poise,
    Give us more noise!
    Tonal inebriates, drunken with sound,
    Pound, brothers, pound!
    Furiously, frenziedly, round and around
    Whirls the mad medley of ear splitting notes,
    Like the yelling of demons with flame blackened throats.

    Music is stricken, is dying, ’tis said,
    Over her head,
    Set all the boiler works off on a spree!
    Jazz and more jazz in a mad jamboree,
    Music is dead!

    But still in the morning the song sparrow sings
    And blithely she wings,
    And from her gay throat a sweet melody springs,
    Old as the Pyramids, new as the dawn,
    Music will live when this madness has gone.

    Blah, blurb!
    Pronoun and verb.
    For poetry give us a barbaric yawp
    Slop, Stop!
    The stuff that some long haired Bohemian raves
    Would make Keats and Tennyson turn in their graves
    Miscalled free verse,
    And trash that is worse.
    Nothing too banal or trite or absurd,
    Such is the artistic triumph preferred,
    To melodies sung
    When old Homer was young.
    Out with the rhyming brook, limpid and pure,
    Open a sewer!

    Let the nymph Poesy cover her face,
    Downcast and blushing at such a disgrace.
    Garbage of words and cesspool of thought
    Columns and pages of rubbish and rot,
    Only a blot!

    This is not Poesy spawned in the mire,
    High on Olympus she still sounds her lyre
    With the immortals. Her rapt, vibrant fire
    Blasts like a flame
    All the abortions brought forth in her name.

    Smear, daub!
    Plaster on canvas an unsightly gob
    Yellow and scarlet and purple and pink,
    Looks like a mess that has spilled in the sink.
    But call it a sunset o’er Harlem, in truth
    Or a beautiful woman enamoured with youth.
    Just a name, any name that you think of will do,
    And if you insert a poor outline or two,
    Be sure that you violate all the known rules.
    The masters were fools!
    For painting is only a sleep walker’s trance.
    Walpurgis is with us so on with the dance!
    For the forms that great Phidias carved out of stone
    Misshapen monstrosities, muscle and bone
    Now simper and leer,
    At vapid admirers who openly jeer
    At beauty of tinting or outline or form
    And foment a storm,
    Of sickly approval at each newest fright
    That clutters our galleries, angers our sight.
    For art is a blight!

    O that some genius great hearted and sane
    Would banish such trash of a disordered brain!
    For beauty will ever be noble and fine
    And speaking through music or color or line
    Her voice is divine!




                     WHEN THE LOCUSTS ARE IN BLOOM


        When the locusts are in bloom
        Every bud - a riven tomb
    Yields a spirit form, emerging pure as snow,
        Dancing lightly on the breeze
        Like the foam on fairy seas,
    Swinging like enchanted censers to and fro.

        And the moonbeams, white and chaste,
        Through the branches interlaced,
    How they seem to drip into each ivory cup,
        Where anon, the summer heats
        Mingle all those honeyed sweets
    That the bee, with nectar drunken, loves to sup.

        Wondrous pendants set with gems
        Clinging to the swaying stems
    How each chalice overflows into the stream
        Of the scented hours that glide
        Down a timeless, golden tide
    To the islands where the lotus eaters dream.

        So we idly float along
        On the bluebird’s lilting song
    To a region where the blossoms never die.
        For through all the cloying hours
        In the thralldom of the flowers
    Fancy roams in far off cloudlands of the sky.




                        THE HARVEST OF THE SEA


    It is harvest time in the teeming sea
    And the surges labor tirelessly
    Like toil bent reapers with sickles of foam
    They garner the harvest and carry it home,
    Till the beaches throb to the rhythmic beat
    As they strew it in windrows at our feet.

    Slender strands like a whip lash, tear
    At the cowering sands - ’tis the Dead-Man’s Hair
    And the rockweed bulges with bulbous lumps
    All yellow and brown, with the jagged stumps
    Of kelp stalks wrenched by the undertow
    From sunken glens where the sea things grow.

    Eel grass rolled by the waves at play
    In fresh cut swaths like the new mown hay;
    Lettuce that glints with a fragile sheen:
    And Irish moss with its mottled green
    And cream and purple and pink and brown
    From the matted gulfs where sailors drown!

    Algae dyed like a fresh blown rose
    Red is their telltale hue that glows
    On the white sands edging the brooding sea.
    A network of delicate imagery
    Like the thin fine lines of an etching traced
    That the blundering surges have not erased.

    Harvest from tide tilled fields that bloom
    Deep down where the sunlight fades in gloom.
    Gardens of sinister mystery
    Under the waves of the heaving sea.
    Gardens the living may never know
    Where dead men drift in the ebb and flow!

    Jungles where fishes and creatures strange
    Through the lush profusion may freely range.
    Not for the living but for the dead
    Are those fields submerged that we may not tread,
    But their harvest is scattered within our reach
    By the wild waves mourning along the beach.




                              BEACH GRASS


    Tremulous as elfin lances
    Are the thin shafts of the beach grass,
    Blades and tufted points that quiver
    Eerily to winds of midnight;
    Magic strings on lyres enchanted,
    Strings that strum a lilting cadence
    Played upon by fairy fingers.

    Beach grass blades that whirl and struggle
    In the clutch of boisterous breezes.
    Needle tips that mark strange circles
    In the cowering sands beneath them,
    Tracings of a fairy stylus,
    Runic etchings vague and ghostlike.

    Tenuous roots, like bamboo jointed
    Delving, burrowing neath the surface
    Of the rough hewn sand dunes moulded
    By great Nature’s groping fingers;
    (Waves and tempests are her fingers)
    With their living network binding
    Crumbling sands that melt and vanish -
    In a woven web of fibre.
    Threading with tenacious purpose
    Mantles lovely and protective,
    Till the battered landscape brightens
    Smiles through scars and cruel gashes
    Smiles in glossy, rippling beach grass
    Undulating in the breezes
    Like a field of ripened barley.

    Beach grass, desperate, clinging, gripping
    Braving wrath of winter tempests,
    Scourged by sands that sting like nettles,
    Blinding clouds that lash and smother,
    Wet with driven spume and frosted,
    With the salt and oft half buried,
    As the tortured dunes roll landward,
    Uncouth monsters, struggling, straining
    By the rage of Neptune driven
    Stumbling, sprawling, lurching onward.

    But the beach grass, fragile, yielding
    Like a seine whose mesh entangles,
    Binds their heaving bulks together -
    In a fibrous web of rootlets;
    Gripping fiercely for each foothold
    Yielding grudgingly and battling
    Till the storm winds howl in fury,
    And the baffled ocean smothers
    Futile wrath in foam and roaring,
    Till the lowly beach grass triumphs;
    Holds in magic chains the forces
    Of ungovernable chaos.

    Beach grass drawing life and nurture
    From the sterile sands, a living
    Energy from out the desert.
    Hardy warrior, silent tamer
    Of primeval urgings rampant,
    Barrier to the clamorous ocean,
    Staunch preserver of the landscape,
    Not content with curbing surges
    Or restraining restless sand dunes,
    How you bless that sterile desert
    With your wild and pensive beauty;
    Cover o’er its savage harshness
    With the mantle of your verdure
    Till your patient, steadfast purpose
    Glorifies the vanquished sea shore.




                            THE SWAMP HERON


    “Quawk”, comes that harshly guttural note
    In the night stillness, hear it? “Quawk”.
    A hoarse “good hunting” from the throat
    Of a night heron, feathered gawk,
    Ungainly, droll, the awkward child
    And threadbare outcast of the wild.

    ’Tis not his custom to intrude
    Where others are, while on his way
    To his beloved solitude
    Nor has he overmuch to say;
    His only greeting is a squawk
    But filled with cheer, a friendly “Quawk”.

    Thanks, humble neighbor of the moors
    For such philosophy is rare;
    Though neither grace nor charm are yours
    You envy no one, nor compare
    Their lissome poise - your stilt like walk!
    Their lilting song - your throaty “Quawk”.

    He knows, illfavored bird of night
    The finest feathers in the dark
    Are little worth, nor pleasing flight
    Nor beauty’s form with none to mark;
    Contented but to nightly stalk
    His supper like a wise old quawk.




                        THE THROES OF CREATION


    Crash and a smother of foam
      Drowned in a booming roar!
    That is the way the surge comes home
      Pounding along the shore.

    Hiss and a seething tongue
      Laps at the crumbling sand!
    That is the way the sea has wrung
      Room from the grudging land.

    Rasp of the undertow
      As its white tongue flays the beach,
    Flensing the pebbles to and fro
      Into its treacherous reach.

    Ever the sob and moan
      Of the tortured ledges rings
    Grinding to dust and welding to stone
      Ever the hammer swings.

    Never a solid ground
      Nor a fixed and steadfast place;
    Shoals new risen and islands drowned
      Sculpture the landscape’s face.

    Thus were the corners laid
      For the continents and the seas;
    That is the way the world was made
      Out of such conflicts as these.

    Up from the ocean’s bed;
      Into the ocean cast
    Surging through infinite ages ahead
      Out of an infinite past.

[Illustration:

  The Methodist Meeting House at South Truro was known to many old
  timers as Hog’s Back Church. The following verses were written
  while it was still standing, though long deserted and neglected.
  But to those who knew and admired it, as I did, it deserves
  something more than the simple granite slab that marks its site.
  For it remains a lasting memory of a former era on old Cape Cod.]




                           HOG’S BACK CHURCH


    Foursquare it stands!
    A stalwart witness year by year
    To courage steadfast but austere.
    The toilworn hands
    That shaped its beams and laid its floors
    Are folded now. The toilers lie
    In marble dotted rows nearby
    Though some found graves on distant shores
    And some were lost at sea!
    This fickle, carefree world might heed
    Those iron men of Pilgrim breed,
    Though rude their lives and stern their bent
    They built a during monument
    To strict integrity.

    Foursquare it stands!
    And gazes out o’er Pamet Bay
    Once whitened by the sails that lay
    Where now are choking sands.
    The weathered houses prim and square
    That marked the hillsides everywhere
    Have disappeared,
    But that old church in stately pride
    Still dominates the countryside;
    Is still revered.

    Foursquare it stands!
    The dust upon the pulpit lies
    Whence lurid texts and prophecies
    Were hurled like burning brands.
    No more the silent walls are stirred
    By thunders of Jehovah’s wrath
    That seekers for the “Narrow Path”
    Once, trembling, heard;
    They reverenced an awful Name
    And glimpsed the pit of quenchless flame
    In God’s own word.

    Foursquare it stands on hallowed ground
    And from its lonely windswept height
    A landmark like a beacon light
    Its spire is seen for leagues around.
    Though times may change, and changing creeds
    Are modified to modern needs
    Still staunch and true,
    Memorial of a former age
    It keeps the priceless heritage
    From olden time to new.

    The plaster from the ceiling falls
    On creaking floors, and in the dead
    Of night there sounds the ghostly tread
    Of phantom footsteps. But the walls
    Still battle with the winter gale
    That roars about the ancient spire,
    Nor all its torrents can avail
    To drown that spark of living fire -
    The spirit of that temple set
    On crowning heights, lest men forget!

    Foursquare it stands!
    The bell, long silent, seems to ring
    And to the world its message fling;
    “I yield alone to God’s commands.
    “Though all about may change, not I.
    “True to my settled destiny
    “I still remain.
    “Though constancy be but a wraith
    “Steadfastly I have kept the faith
    “And shall maintain
    “That faith, unfaltering, down the years
    “Through all the shoals of doubts and fears,
    “A lighthouse on that shoreless sea
    “That broadens to Eternity”.

    There, like the Sphinx the old church broods
    Among its deepening solitudes.
    In simple grandeur let it stand
    For years unborn, to bless the land,
    And when its timeworn tower has gone
    Still may its memory linger on.

       *       *       *       *       *

                  _Struck by lightning in a thunder storm
                  on the night of March 21, 1940 and
                  totally destroyed._




                           BEYOND THE POINT


    A ridge of sand dunes barricades the rim
    Of the horizon like a gilded bar
    To roving sight; a lonely point, the brim
    Of earth against the moaning surge. Afar
    My glances wander, wistfull, ill at ease
    From longing to explore those far off seas.

    The murmuring tide creeps up before my feet
    And leaves a shell or two, a broken spray
    Of strange sea growth; then to some chill retreat
    In ocean’s depths it slowly ebbs away.
    How blithely thought can trail the screaming terns
    Beyond the boundaries that the eye discerns!

    On the horizon looms that point beside
    The pathless main, a prison door to me;
    For I would follow on that restless tide
    To lands remote beyond a shoreless sea;
    Through shimmering haze how like a magic wand
    That dune ridged finger beckons me beyond!

    The rolling hills enclose me and the sky
    Bends overhead, but these are different things;
    Somehow they do not seem to press so nigh
    As that wind fretted wall of sand that rings
    My little world about, and intervenes
    To shut my vision from enchanted scenes.

    And though in happier days I sailed those seas
    Around the globe upon the buoyant trades
    To Ceylon, Singapore and Celebes,
    Beheld their fanes and trod their tropic glades
    Those voyages leave me still unsatisfied
    In this lone cottage where I now abide.

    Beyond the point what vistas of romance
    Of golden kingdoms still their wealth unfold:
    Though fettered by the bonds of circumstance
    My failing vision and my limbs grown old
    Among the embers of my memories
    One lingering flame, adventure, never dies.




                           THE WINDS OF TIME


    O the winds of time sweep the lonely years
    Like withered leaves down the path of night,
    And their notes, like a dirge, sound in our ears
    As our eyes are strained for a glimpse of light.
    And our sad heart utters a voiceless prayer -
        Whence do ye come - ye bitter winds,
        Where do ye go - O where?

    Through the swarming suns where the Zodiac’s blaze
    Fades out in the awful deeps of space,
    As you hurry us on your unknown ways,
    Shall our feet leave never a trace?
    Rushed from the light to the silent dark,
        Tell us, tell us, O mocking winds
        Is there a voice - O hark!

    And the wondrous things we planned to do
    In those far off days when our hearts were young.
    But the task was long and the hours were few
    And the songs we dreamed of are still unsung.
    Will our hopes fade out when the light is gone?
        Whisper, whisper, O pitiless winds,
        Is there another dawn?

    Where are the friends that we used to know?
    Like the fallen leaves gone one by one.
    And the scenes that we loved in the long ago
    Faint shadows still in the setting sun.
    They have gone - we go - for the wild winds rave -
        “The path that ye tread in silent dread
        Leads on to an open grave!”

    But those voices hushed, they linger yet
    Like the haunting chords of a lost refrain.
    And those scenes we can see with a sweet regret
    Though their outlines are blurred they still remain
    Shall they live - those things - in our groping brain,
        Like the ocean’s surge in an empty shell
        Nor live elsewhere again?




                           TO AN AGED WILLOW


    Ancient willow, drooping low
    Gnarled old trunk and withered bough.
    Though they say you’re dying now
    I can never have it so.

    Massive limbs against the sky
    Wrestling with the winds of heaven,
    E’en the thunder crashing levin
    Like old Ajax you defy.

    Where your mournful branches bend
    Countless birds their nests have made
    Woodland songsters unafraid.
    You, old willow, were their friend.

    And you sheltered me as well,
    Often in the summer’s heat
    Idly musing at your feet
    I have felt your soothing spell.

    Rustling softly through the leaves
    Pendulous to every air,
    Peace and solace everywhere
    Dripped like raindrops from the eaves.

    And the white clouds floating by
    Bore me to the shores of dreams -
    Blissful yet the memory seems -
    Loved companion, must you die?

    No cathedral’s gloomy nave
    Or cold monument for me,
    Rather let me have a tree
    As a marker for my grave.

    And the Land of Yet-to-Be
    Where sun risen glories play,
    May it see you clothed some day
    In immortal greenery.




[Illustration]




                          THE OLD WOODS ROAD


    It blunders off through ways obscure
      The old woods road I used to tread,
    Until its columned walls immure
      The sunbeams dripping overhead.

    Through scented gloom it seems to wind
      O’er fallen branches mossy green,
    And leaving all the world behind
      Gropes blindly toward a world unseen.

    The ancient wheel ruts disappear
      With pine and scrub oak overgrown,
    No creaking wain for many a year
      Has trailed its coverts wild and lone.

    “I wonder where that old road goes?”
      I hear some blithe young voices say
    And I might tell them if I chose
      “Back to the land of yesterday.”




                           THE POVERTY WEED


    O the poverty weed is so shabby and poor
      That she seems to disfigure the land,
    The russet clad waif of the desolate moor
      She buries her face in the sand.

    Her threadbare old mantle all faded and frayed
      What beauty can ever adorn?
    As she cowers in the background this shy desert maid
      So lowly, despised and forlorn.

    But over that moorland in splashes of gold
      Like sunbeams enriching the gloom,
    What visions of loveliness seem to unfold
      When the poverty weed is in bloom!

    Aglow are those hillsides once barren and lone
      And golden those patches of green,
    When this poor floral outcast comes into her own
      And the blossoms all bow to their queen.




                        THE SWEEP OF THE TIDES


    Out of the fathomless ocean
    Shaking the earth with their strides,
    Chaos resurgent in motion,
    Battle the foam bearded tides.
    Titans stupendous, upheaving,
    Flouting the roaring Monsoon,
    Hoarse with the joy of achieving
    Freedom to reach for the moon.

    Titans whose dungeons are riven
    Sped on their turbulent path,
    Not by Poseidon driven
    Nor by grim Eolus’ wrath,
    Clamorous, never delaying,
    Scouring the outermost dune,
    Sullen but ever obeying
    That mocking enchantress - the moon.

    Fundy is choked with their foaming,
    Fiercely they snarl ’round the Horn,
    Glinting like steel in the gloaming,
    Patined with gold at morn;
    White with the ice of the Behring,
    Green with sargassum strewn
    Wolves of the deep, never nearing,
    But ever pursuing the moon.

    Round and around and forever
    Dizzily circling the globe;
    Torn by impassioned endeavor
    Clutching, to touch but her robe;
    Wraithlike that robe, but enduring,
    Trailing her silvery lune,
    Woven of moonbeams alluring,
    Tracing the path to the moon.

    Formless, uncouth, terrifying,
    Goading the indolent seas;
    Breathing out clouds with their sighing,
    Draining the deep of its lees,
    Mountainous troughing and cresting,
    Then calm as a coral lagoon,
    Limitless yearning and questing
    Madness bewitched by the moon.

    Monstrous caress of the ocean
    Fondling the obdurate land,
    Urged by abyssmal emotion
    Granite may hardly withstand,
    Beats of a world olden measure
    Savage but roughly in tune,
    Floodtime and ebb at the pleasure
    Of that horned enchantress - the moon.

    Alternate plunge and upheaval
    Strong as earth giants who strove
    Grandly in aeons primeval
    Braving omnipotent Jove;
    Forces terrific, whose rages
    Drown out the shrieking Typhoon
    Storming through infinite ages
    After a phantom - the moon!




                           LOST BILLINGSGATE


    From Billingsgate the beacons’s flash
    No longer stabs the quivering dark,
    But fang like breakers foam and gnash
    Above its sand bars ribbed and stark.
    Where whispering grasses used to grow
    And nesting terns their shelter made,
    Now snarls the rasping undertow
    And breezes mutter - half afraid!

    For it has gone like Lyonnesse
    Of Arthur’s reign - enchanted realm
    Of dreamy eyed forgetfulness
    That saw the ocean overwhelm
    Her shores, till e’en the towers were drowned
    Where Merlin spun his evil spells,
    And fishers startle - when the sound
    Wells upward as from sunken bells!

    Yes, Billingsgate is lost to view
    Beneath the all engulfing sea,
    The lonely Isle the Pilgrims knew -
    But still it lives in memory.
    And sometimes in the dead of night
    We hear the shoal bemoan its fate
    Clothed in a shroud of breakers white -
    The ghost of vanished Billingsgate!




                              TRANSFORMED


        A battered thing it seems
    That salt encrusted drift wood, but the skies
    Showed never rainbow with more gorgeous dyes
        Than gild that firelight’s beams.

        The cloud banks dull and grey
    Far in the west, are but a canvas spread
    For supernatural scenes in gold and red
        When ends the dying day.

        The icy Frost King lays
    His finger on the leaves and lo, the fires
    Of fairy land on autumn’s funeral pyres
        Seem everywhere ablaze.

        And so each inner trace
    Of life’s deep grief and cankered bitterness
    Is graven in those lines of kindliness
        Upon an aged face.




                            HAUNTING ECHOES


    The music dies upon the strings
      But lingers on
    Like other sweetly treasured things
      Here once - and gone.

    The breeze that blurs the mirror pool
      Cannot erase
    The outline of the forest cool
      Upon its face.

    The haunting fragrance of the flowers
      Of yesterday
    Not all the intervening hours
      Can steal away.

    And loving friends we used to know
      Nor e’er forget
    Although they left us long ago
      Seem with us yet.




                              LOST AT SEA


    Through bushes half obscured, a marble slab
    Peers out like a pale face. Inscribed upon
    Its weathered surface that the lichen growth
    And winter’s storms have blurred, a few brief words
    The curious eye may spell with labored care.
    To “H” and “M” - perhaps - and the terse phrase
    So haunting in its stark simplicity
    And pathos, - “Lost at sea.” The changeless gulfs
    Of ocean knew the dead man mentioned here
    Where bushes riot o’er an empty grave,
    But what old friend remembers him today?
    Ofttimes, no doubt, upon the wet sea sand
    He traced his name in childhood, while the waves
    Erased the halting script. Another hand
    Has etched that name in form more durable;
    But year by year, the ceaseless ebb and flow
    Of time’s remorseless tides obliterate
    The letters shrunken to initials faint,
    And that last solemn statement - “Lost at sea”.
    Much has been written on the vanity
    Of human life, but never penned more tense
    With meaning than this lonely epitaph
    Set in a thicket on a crumbling stone.




                               THE ASPEN


    Lonely aspen rising high
    Straight and true you greet the eye.
    Bent by every passing breeze
    Weakest, slenderest of trees;
    Yet what grace, what stateliness
    Every leaf and twig express!

    Brittle limbs of little worth,
    How from out thy meager girth
    May we fashion wood for use?
    What may be the frail excuse
    For thy lovely shaft of green
    On the verge of my ravine?

    But the aspen, wise and shy
    Never deigned to make reply.
    Swayed to every wandering air
    Shed its beauty everywhere,
    Till its friendly dignity
    Made its message clear to me.

    God designed thee, aspen slim
    Who am I to question Him?
    In the mighty scheme of things
    You and I play minor strings
    Yet your part has been well done
    Mine is only half begun!




[Illustration]




                       THE SONG OF THE SEA GULLS


    Hark how the sea gulls are screaming with glee
      Piercing as Pipes of Pan!
    Keening their songs to the beach and the sea
      Sung since the world began;
    O’er breakers combing in jubilant strife,
    Flecked with their foaming and throbbing with life,
    Here they come homing - O shrill as a fife
      List to their wild elan!

    They are the spirits exultant and free,
      Up in the clouds they belong.
    Ever aspiring in skyland to be,
      Theirs is the verve of the strong.
    Here they go steering through canyons of air,
    Onward careering, and eager to dare,
    Scornful of fearing with never a care
      List to the lilt of their song!




                           BROKEN FRAGMENTS


    Only a bit of broken glass
    Half concealed in the tangled grass,
    But the sunbeam found a pathway through
    On its arrow flight from the vault of blue
    And straight through the weed grown thicket came
    To touch that glass with its kindling flame.

    Only a sunbeam’s glinting gold
    On a splintered bit that we now behold
    Rich with crimson and purple sheen
    Autumn yellow and vernal green
    Until, transfigured, it glows arrayed
    In the rainbow aura the sunbeam made.

    Only an old man bent and gray
    Gazing into the far-away.
    Human wreckage forlorn and lone
    But his face with a sudden glory shone.
    Was it the sunbeam’s magic wand
    Or hidden splendors he glimpsed beyond?

    Only a bit of shattered glass,
    And a poor old man that we idly pass,
    But the shard like a diamond, glittered bright
    And the time worn face suffused with light,
    When the gates in the jasper walls swung wide
    And those broken fragments were glorified.




                           WORKERS OF MAGIC


    Immured in the downy cocoon
    A marvelous artisan spins
    With threads like the beams of the moon
    So gossamer fine. Have the Djinns
    Who dream in the mulberry trees,
    O weaver beyond compare,
    Bewitched with the shimmer of orient seas
    Your fabric so lustrous and fair?
    Toiler imprisoned who weaves and weaves
    A silken glory from naught but leaves.

    To the mollusc, tormented, which holds
    The irritant sand in his shell,
    What radiant vision unfolds
    Invoked by the mermaiden’s spell?
    As he fashions that shape, and imbues
    It with colors he never has seen,
    With opalescent and rainbow hues,
    A pearl with the fairylike sheen
    Of the sea. O artist whom fate condemns
    To gild with beauty this queen of gems.

    In his desolate attic alone
    In the gloom of the midnight hour,
    The poet, despondent, unknown
    Is thrilled by that wizardly power
    That the silk worm and pearl oyster feel
    The urge to create! And his brain
    Like the anvil resounding to steel
    In a minstrelsy vibrant with pain,
    Sends sparkles blazing through singing lines
    As the verse with his burning thought combines.




                           MY GOLDEN FLEECE


    When but a child my eyes would oft forsake
    The blurring page, and through the window seek
    Like an escaping bird, the wonderland
    Of dreams, till my instructor, grave, enquired
    “Wool gathering again?” So mid the halls
    Of classic learning out into the world
    Of bruise and bitterness but softening all
    As summer haze dissolves the jagged peaks
    And makes the deserts bloom - my fancy blithe,
    Drinking the waters of eternal youth,
    Has ventured many a lordly enterprise
    Wool gathering down the years.
                    Now older grown
    Calm in the tranqil gloaming of my life
    I dwell apart, the while my mellow lamp
    With tapestry of shadow drapes the wall
    And e’en the crickets shrilling greets my ear
    Like pipes of Arcady. There friends long gone
    Cluster about with gladsomeness, and scenes
    From recollection gleaned or fancy limned
    Expand my chamber to horizons vast
    Till pensively I muse “Wool gathering still?”

    Bless all kind fairies of fond Memory’s brood,
    Or those which grace Imaginations court,
    For treasures such as these. Jason of old,
    Who led his argonauts through seas of blood
    Seeking the golden fleece, has set the course
    For dreamers through all ages yet to come.

    O Hero legended, thine be the goal
    My yearning eyes would glimpse. What cloudland slopes
    Feed those immortal sheep whose fleeces bright
    Are woven into dreams are ever hid
    Beyond my ken. But the great quest is mine
    To glorify the drabness of the years
    Life’s sterile day by day.
                    One need not gain
    The fabled hoard that marks the rainbow’s end
    To feel, beholding that resplendent arch
    A link with faery land. Wool gathering - yes
    But rather say the guerdon wisdom brings,
    The magic touch that gilds the commonplace
    With beauty and delight, the lustrous threads
    In life’s rough fabric drawn from fleece of gold.




                            THE LONE LILAC


    Only a cellar broken
      Down to a dimpled mound,
    Of the olden time a token
      In the brier entangled ground.

    And a lonely lilac vagrant
      As a sunbeam lost in gloom,
    Close by like a garland fragrant
      At the door of a crumbling tomb.

    Full many a tree appearing
      Has ploughed through the sodden loam
    Where once was a fertile clearing
      Protecting a friendly home.

    And sweet as the perfume welling
      From the lilac over the way,
    Was life in that quaint old dwelling
      In that long forgotten day.

    Under the eaves, enfolded
      It mothered its little brood;
    But the sills long since have molded
      To dust in that solitude.

    Now through the locusts treading
      (A grove from a single one)
    Like the virile banyan spreading
      Neath the burning Indian sun.

    We can vision those fields in culture;
      And the beds once bright with flowers,
    Where a crow now sits like a vulture,
      And broods through the sunlit hours.

    While stark through the verdure risen
      Like the tides in the distant bay,
    Through a cleft in its leafy prison
      Peers the lilac over the way.

    Anon as the breezes bluster,
      Then die and are strangely mute,
    The echoing memories cluster
      Like strains from a far off lute.

    We can almost hear the fingers
      Strumming an elfin lay -
    For the soul of that home still lingers
      In the lilac over the way.




                            FRIENDLY LIGHTS


    Welcome greetings through the dark
      From the lamp light burning clear
    In some lonely home, a spark
      Radiating warmth and cheer.

    Lighthouse darting from the lea
      Flaming lances o’er the foam,
    Wandering mariners at sea
      You are guiding safely home.

    Glow worm on a summer night
      Torch within an elfin hand,
    Marking by your zig zag flight
      Ways obscure to fairy land.

    Starry twinkle in the blue
      To illumine worlds on high
    Far off orb we share with you
      Friendliness of earth and sky.




                         TO MY CHERRY BLOSSOM


    From old Japan beyond the sea
    A fairy vision beckons me,
    A vale where cool the shadows rest
    From Fujiyama’s towering crest,
    A ruined temple’s crumbling wall
    Lulled by a drowsy waterfall,
    A shrine in whose corroding bell
    Faint murmurs, long forgotten, dwell,
    And Buddha, brooding day by day
    Dreams the slow centuries away
          In old Japan.

    There might the careworn find release
    In calm Nirvana’s perfect peace.
    There might the traveler inhale
    The haunting sweetness of that vale,
    An incense from the flowery gloom
    Where clustering cherry blossoms bloom
    In petaled purity that glows
    Like Fujiyama’s drifting snows;
    The fragrance of a far off clime
    From some remote, forgotten time
          In old Japan.

    There might I roam in fancy free
    That Orient vale beyond the sea,
    By Nippon’s shores an Eden seek
    Neath Fujiyama’s storied peak.
    But here, - where happier far, I’d be
    A CHERRY BLOSSOM blooms for me.
    I glimpse within her starry eyes
    A nearer view of Paradise,
    My Shrine and Eden is our home,
    Nor need my wandering fancy roam
          To old Japan.




                            GRAINS OF SAND


    Fine gleanings of the ledges, golden grains
    That ponderous glaciers reaped long, long ago
    From battlemented crags and furrowed plains
    Grinding and crushing with resistless flow,
    To mingle with the melting seas, and heap
    Their flinty harvestings in windrows; strew
    The granite kernels for the thunderous deep
    To winnow endlessly and grind anew.

    Where are those lordly peaks that once defied
    The fury of the gales, nor deigned to bow
    To heaven’s own lightning? How the scornful tide
    Washes about and putters with them now;
    Yes, even my weak fingers have the power
    To fashion as I will or idly thrust
    Into a glass to mark the fleeting hour,
    These grains of sand - some crumbled mountain’s dust




                          THE FUNERAL WREATH


    There is a cottage trim and neat,
      Who dwelt within I cannot say,
    It seemed so homey a retreat,
      My steps have often led that way.
    But now a wreath is hung before
            Its silent door.

    A funeral wreath of sombre tone
      Where Death has shed a ray of gloom;
    And someone mourns for someone gone
      Within a vacant darkened room.
    So eloquent of human grief
            Is every leaf!

    Such is the laurel crown that waits
      Our journey’s end through toil and tears;
    The emblem grim that decorates
      Your door and mine, e’er many years
    So that some idle passer by
            May wonder why!




                                MEMORY


    She crouches in the caves of thought
    Enchantress, brooding o’er the fire,
    And those her mystic charms have sought
    Shall sometime gain their heart’s desire.
    With mumblings and averted gaze
    She weaves her spells, while to and fro
    Like shadows from the mounting blaze,
    Upon the walls there come and go
    The scenes of far off happier days
    Faint visions of the long ago.

    The eastern tyrant steals in dead of night
    Down rock hewn stairs and through an iron door;
    And feasts his eyes by flaring torch’s light
    Upon the wealth heaped on his treasury floor;
    On bursting sacks of coin, caskets of gems
    Scepters of ruby, diamond diadems,
    A kingdom’s plunder. We, like him, have stored
    Our hidden wealth, and memory keeps the key,
    No jewels lustreless, are in our hoard
    But trophies of a richer dynasty,
    The sweet experiences that time endears
    Sifted and winnowed gleanings of the years.

    With halting steps and labored breath we climb
    The attic stairs and rummage sadly through
    The toys and trifling things our childhood knew,
    Until our brooding thoughts are lost to time,
    And like the dust motes dancing in the beams
    Come thronging memories through a mist of dreams.

    Forth from an aged tome there falls a flower
    Faded and crumbling, yet its petals glow,
    Once more in the sweet memory of that hour
    When loving fingers gave it long ago.

    As through the spectral city of the dead
    With downcast eyes and reverential tread
    We note the broken columns and the urns
    In marble draped, and e’er our gaze returns
    To our own name graved on the granite bare
    The death date blank - yet it will soon be there!

    Then Memory leads us with a sad, sweet smile
    Among those grass grown mounds. On many a stone
    Are names of those we loved - A little while
    And we shall be with them among our own.
    We seem to hear their welcoming voices ring;
    A whisper comes - “O death where is thy sting?”

    Alone we came into this world - alone
    We venture forth. And recollections fond
    Are all that we may bear to the beyond
    To lay, some day, before a great white throne!

    Our life has been a path forlorn that winds
    Forever on through gnarled and twisted years
    Of forest gloom. A path that memory finds
    And helps us trace it backward through our tears.

    Upon a beechen trunk, deep in the bark
    Two carven hearts by single arrow cleft:
    How many years since youth, with ardent hand
    Inscribed them there. Two hearts and one bereft!

    In the long autumn afternoons we go
    By russet moors and watch the slanting rays
    Bathe all the landscape with a golden haze
    That melts its harsher outlines. Thus the flow
    Of years has smoothed away each grief and pain
    Of childhood and life’s later bitterness,
    While Memory, with a witching tenderness,
    Has glorified the things that still remain.

    In pensive revery our fancy turns
    Out to the west where the red sunset burns,
    Fain would we ponder when our sun may set
    And yield to the sad sweetness of regret,
    But Memory thrills with wild ecstasies
    Before that miracle of blazing skies.

    In awe we gaze as lengthening shadows loom
    And night peers forth. But Memory hovers near
    We clutch her fingers in the deepening gloom
    And trembling hang upon her words of cheer,
    Till with a hopeful glance she points afar
    Where, like a gem on velvet, gleams a star!

    We stand aghast beneath the vaulted dome
    Aglitter with creation’s rhapsodies
    The countless stars. And let our fancy roam
    Through space unfathomed, past the Pleiades
    Out to the deeps beyond. Until the veil
    That shuts us from the past seems strangely stirred
    And recollections vague - beyond the pale -
    Flit through our brain, half thoughts confused and blurred.
    A former life upon some sunnier sphere!
    Things long forgot and dimly sensed again
    Far off, for one rapt moment hover near.
    We strive to clutch them, but we strive in vain.
    Does Memory mock us, or in fear perchance

    Shield us from some grim Terror’s Gorgon glance
    That glares unseen, from out the dark! Farflung
    A wisp of cloud darts like a dragon’s tongue
    And laps Orion’s belt. At glowing dawn
    The constellations fade - the veil is drawn!

    The blood stained trail of history winds away
    Through ruined cities and past crumbling walls
    Half buried, where the tottering columns sway
    To winds that blunder through the vacant halls.
    Beyond lie relics of remoter time
    Dolmens and cromlechs, monoliths of stone
    Inscriptions weird and uncouth monsters carved
    On cavern walls, and bits of splintered bone
    Traced when the hairy mammoth ranged among
    Wild fens and woodlands when the world was young.

    For all the runes inscribed on History’s page
    As Time’s slow finger etched them age by age
    For our dim eyes to see,
    Are but the priceless, deathless heritage
    Of Memory.

    The traveler venturing into deserts grim
    That shimmer on the hot horizon’s rim,
    Does battle with the demons of the heat
    While sands like burning fingers, claw his feet
    But other wayfarers have braved the wrath
    Of scorching wastes - their bones still mark the path!

    Our counsellor and guide, calm Memory holds
    The golden balances whose scale unfolds
    The wisdom of the tried - experience true.
    The balance trembles, what ought we to do?
    It dips, it falls, the standard points the way
    Today’s decisions rest on yesterday.

    Upon the shores of Time’s vast sea we stand
    And peer into the gathering mists that rise
    Dark and portentious before our eyes,
    While through our fingers slip the grains of sand.
    We know the waves advancing, will not stay
    But wash our stumbling footprints all away.

    Into that sea have sailed the winged hours
    Like argosies by youthful fancy sent
    On joyous quest to some far Orient
    Created in our dreams, pagoda’d towers
    To bold adventure beckoning gaily on,
    While tropic skies lent their romantic lure.
    But those exotic hours, alas, have gone
    And broken memories alone endure.

    O time may rob us of our dearest friends.
    But not our memories! The present blends
    Into the vanished vistas of the past.
    Riches have taken wings but at the last
    A pittance left us. Old, we yet may drink
    From youth’s eternal fount. A golden link
    Still binds us with the loved we see no more.
    The lamp lit circle on our chamber floor
    Our little kingdom bounds. Within its space
    Our eyes, through Memory’s magic, see a face
    That shed, long years ago, a reliance there,
    A form adorned that graced a vacant chair.
    How rich and full was life, how barren now!
    Forsaken in our poverty we bow
    To Fate’s decree. But in despairing mood
    Kind Memory, pitying, shares our solitude.

    Are memories but the vain desire
    For happier hours that once were mine?
    The embers of a dying fire.
    The dwindled lees of life’s rich wine?
    Or echoes from a seraph’s lyre
    But lightly touched by hands divine?




                              THE STOKER


  _While a student at college, I voyaged to Naples in the steerage
  of an Italian liner. That was long before the days of the modern
  oil burner and the engine room was a fair reproduction of Dante’s
  Inferno. One afternoon a young stoker, begrimed and perspiring,
  crept up the iron ladder from the stoke hold and sat for a few
  minutes gazing out of an open port. His wistful face remains a
  vivid memory and occasioned the following lines._


    Framed in the iron port there looms a face
    That Rembrandt’s stilus or the sombre muse
    Of Dante might have etched. Pale cheeks and eyes
    That gaze unseeing, out - a forehead damp
    With sweat and smeared with grime - a haunting face
    Through which there peers in wistful apathy
    A parched and withered soul. Some stoker crept,
    Gasping for air up from that hell below,
    Of lurid fires and gloom, where engines groan
    Like blinded Titans, and with giant strength
    Shoulder the huge hulk forward through the brine.

    What thoughts beguile the furrows of that brow
    Does he perchance, recall the sunlit days
    Of childhood in some cottage gay with flowers
    Where Italy, enthroned among her rocks
    Broods o’er her vanished grandeur? Does the spell
    Of romance conjure up the golden past
    When his proud forbears bore the pomp of Rome
    To seas remote, when Roman legions ruled
    The servile world? Did he in flaunting crest,
    And burnished armour tread the galley deck?
    Or did a scourging destiny condemn
    His pain wracked shoulders to the oaken oar?

    To his dulled ears float strains of music sweet
    From gilded cabins where the zest of life
    Enthralls the voyagers, while his the hand
    That drives the moving palace on her course
    Through seas of shimmering light. A gnome begrimed,
    Breathing foul dust and blistered by the heat
    In caverns far below. A galley slave
    Heaving and straining at a deadlier oar -
    An iron bar that burns the calloused palm.

    Whene’er the furnace gapes its dragon jaws
    And blasts him with its breath, with reckless hand
    He flings his youth into that Moloch’s maw!
    And his reward? O bargain infamous
    A mess of pottage for a birth right riven
    Like Esau’s ancient sin. Repulsive fare
    A stinking hole to kennel like a cur
    Battling with vermin, foul and desperate
    Too bitter punishment for branded crime.

    Chained by the manacles of circumstance
    To Vulcan’s smoking forge, a fate more dire
    Than once befell Prometheus wracked upon
    His cross of crags on grizzled Caucausus;
    With every shovel speed the winged hours
    His hopes, his dreams, his life but sordid lumps
    Of coal to feed those flames insatiate.
    Then Death, the pitiful, brings welcome rest.
    His body, warped and shrivelled, slides adown
    The tilted hatchway, weighted at the feet
    A burned out clinker cast into the sea!




                              IMAGINATION


    Blest Being from some happier sphere
    O bend thy luminous footsteps near
      Were Heaven’s gates ajar,
    When down a moonlit path you came
    With dazzling smile and wings of flame
      Fair as the morning star?

    Imagination, radiant sprite
    With crescent crown and stars bedight,
      And seraph’s eyes;
    O guide us up that filmy stair
    By ladders raised on buoyant air
      To vaulting skies!

    Imagination is the singing rhyme
    In life’s dull prose.
    She blooms among the cruel thorns of time
    A beauteous rose.
    No Circe’s spell is hers, the poppy’s lure
    From present pain
    In drug engendered dreams; but calm and pure
    Is her sweet reign.
    Her finger traces in the storm cloud gray
    The rainbow’s arc;
    She sees within the gnarled volcanic clay
    The diamond’s spark;
    Forecasts the harvests in the sodded rows
    The plough shares fling;
    When all the world is buried neath the snows
    She dreams of spring.
    The cave man followed up the savage road
    The torch she bore,
    She marks within life’s rock encumbered lode
    The glinting ore.
    Imagination melts in purple mist
    The jagged peaks;
    And petty things yield to this alchemist
    The gold she seeks.
    No priestess of illusions, vague, unreal
    And not of earth,
    She rather helps us know and see and feel
    A thing’s true worth.

    Along the wistful trail of yesterdays
    Backward sad Memory directs her gaze
    And points her withered hand.
    “Tomorrow” is the magic word that cheers
    Imagination onward through the years
    Where lies her promised land.

    Imagination only can explain
    Those jewelled etchings on our window pane
    By fairies of the frost;
    From icy peaks and breaker fretted seas
    To elven glens beneath snow laden trees
    So cunningly embossed.

    Calm reason tells us there is nothing there
    But mists congealing in the frosted air;
    ’Tis false, calm reason lies.
    For in that witching square the eye beholds
    A glittering world of wonder that unfolds
    Its luminious mysteries.

    Imagination plumbs the deeps of space
    To roam among the stars,
    She gilds the workshop, lights the market place,
    And sunders prison bars.
    Her inspiration made Da Vinci thrill
    And o’er his canvas shone,
    And Michelangelo’s god like visions still
    Endure in living stone.

    Beyond the sunset’s molten lava flood
    Lie mysteries yet untold -
    Imagination sails those seas of blood
    And mounts those walls of gold.
    Her finger laid on blind old Milton’s eyes
    Kindled no earthly glow -
    And deaf Beethoven thrilled to melodies
    No mortal ear may know.

    Imagination decks the naked tree
    With candles burning clear,
    Until transfigured by her witchery
    It blooms with Christmas cheer.
    Life’s pathway leads us to the yawning tomb
    And there it seems to end -
    Imagination peering through the gloom
    Sees visions that transcend.

    Imagination marked the goal
    That fired Columbus’ burning soul,
    Till like a vision through the haze
    A new world burst upon his gaze
      That voyage of destiny.

    And ancient chroniclers relate
    Magellan, groping through the strait,
    Beyond the blue horizon’s rim
    Saw far off islands beckon him
      Out to an unknown sea!

    “Imagination rules the world” so said
    The great Napoleon, and at the head
    Of conquering armies drove his ruthless way
    Made Afric sands and Russian snows obey
    His iron decrees. Upon an Alpine height
    Poised like an eagle, terrible as night,
    He swooped on Italy. His boundless reign
    Was the creation of his lonely brain.

    On upstart thrones he set his underlings.
    Like puppets played with kingdoms and with kings -
    His fingers marked their bounds, his will their power
    Earth’s dictator, in that tremendous hour
    He dreamed like Lucifer, as grandly wove
    His dreams into realty, then strove
    For Godlike heights, and from those heights was hurled
    And in his meteor fall amazed the world!

    The naked truth itself is never true.
    Stern facts are but the skeleton that binds
    Our living fancies. If we seek to view
    Truth absolute, her grisly horror blinds
    Our eyes, for her’s is but the mocking skull,
    Stark, hideous, the poor grain’s withered hull
    After the kernel dies. The glance, the smile,
    Expression, character, the soul beguile
    When, taking form o’er Truth’s repellent base
    Imagination beams with radiant face.

    Imagination is the martial strain
    That fires disheartened soldiers for the fray;
    Her pitying fingers smooth the brow of pain,
    She whispers low, - “This too, shall pass away.”
    Her’s is the vision, the all seeing eye
    That pierces where truth’s nuggets lie concealed.
    Illusions crumble at her query, “Why?”
    The Sphinx’s ancient wisdom is revealed
    To her clear sight. She holds the golden key
    That can unlock the guarded door of fate.
    She is the lodestar of our destiny,
    Her’s is the Godlike impulse to create.
    The treasure that Prometheus once stole
    From Heaven’s high altar is her sacred fire;
    To the insensate clod she is the soul,
    The Phoenix risen from the funeral pyre!

    The atoms spin, the elements adhere
    Till matter forms like mold: and vaunted life
    A fungus growth upon a dying sphere
    Whirls on into the dark. “The futile strife
    “Of some vast mechanism’s grinding gears.” -
    Grim science tells us - but the vision comes
    Of life immortal ranging down the years
    Through endless vistas of milleniums!




                        IN WELLFLEET BY THE SEA


    “Why do you dwell in Wellfleet by the sea?”
        Inquires some wondering friend,
        “Is this quaint village in the dunes the end
    To life’s bright trail, the world that you have known
    Shut out behind you? From a weed draped stone
        “A barnacle might thus survey the sky,
        “As the grand pageant of mankind sweeps by.”

    To this I answer, “Not this quiet place
      But vaster regions are his home as well
      Who humbly seeks where the immortals dwell,
    Those kingly souls of every clime and race.
        The seven branching candlestick ablaze
          With wisdom’s radiant light
        Brightens his studious library at night
        And sheds its all illuminating rays
          Across the lengthening years,
        Till loving presences sages and seers,
    Are his true friends. Must he alone abide
    With Socrates or Shakespeare as his guide?

    Art’s priceless treasures stored in Greece or Rome
          The mighty masters limned
        By the slow lapse of centuries undimmed.
    Fade into nothingness beneath the dome
      Whereon a mightier Artist graves His lines
          And blocks His bold designs;
    For He can etch with lightnings, and His dyes
      Are wrung from clouds that drip with red and gold,
      While silent watchers, awestruck, may behold
    His wonders blazoned on the midnight skies.

    One need not dwell alone beside the sea,
          There are no bars
      To sunder Him who walked on Galilee
      Or blur the vision of the loftiest stars
        No solitary being, set apart,
    Is he who feels the soul sustaining calm
    Steal o’er his spirit like a healing balm
    From Mother Nature’s all embracing heart.

    His dreams are lulled by the resounding sea,
      The rhythm of the waves that never tire,
      While sweeter than the strains of Orpheus’ lyre
    The dying wind’s melodious minstrelsy,
      Ranging this narrow bourne of surf and sand,
      Seems echoing from the horns of fairyland.

    And when he strolls in solitude, the breeze
        That breathes upon his face,
    Was never curbed by this confining space,
    For once it roamed the lonely Hebrides.
          The murmuring tide
    That swells the shallows of this pleasant bay,
    Washed coral islands half a world away
    And coursed through boundless oceans far and wide.

    Rather he looks with sympathetic eye
      As with their faces tense and shut from heaven
      By scorpion whips of fear and envy driven
    The jostling multitudes of men rush by;
      Spurning the bounties kindly Nature gave
      As though in haste for an untimely grave.

    No shadows cast by avarice or pride
        Darken this countryside;
    That tyrant trinity, fame, wealth, and power
    Have somehow lost their spell. Each passing hour
      Bears costlier freight than theirs, the gifts divine -
      Health, gratitude, content. Those gifts are mine
        So why should reckless wastrels pity me
        With all my wealth, in Wellfleet by the sea?




                  PRINTED BY THE CAPE CODDER PRINTERY
                         ORLEANS, MASSACHUSETTS




                          Transcriber’s Notes


 Perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.

 Unusual punctuation has been retained as printed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON OLD CAPE COD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


